

--- PAGE 1 ---

(

oo» Antonia Clare + JJ Wilson
a,

°

2ND a

EDITION >

iS)

m

g

=I

fe)

Zz

Speakout 2nd Edition is a comprehensive six-level general English _
course for adults that has been developed in association with =
BBC Worldwide and BBC Learning English. The course integrates 3
authentic video from popular BBC programmes into every unit and =
builds the skills and knowledge learners need to express themselves cy

confidently in a real English-speaking environment.

Completely revised and aligned to the Global Scale of English, this
edition has striking new visuals, updated reading and Listening texts,
new video clips and a large bank of additional practice material.

Speakout Extra provides downloadable worksheets that meet
learners’ individual needs by providing them with additional grammar,
vocabulary, pronunciation and skills practice. It also includes extra
video exploitation activities to help learners get the most out of the
BBC clips.

Intermediate
* Students’ Book with DVD-ROM J
* Students’ Book with DVD-ROM and MyEnglishLab Stu d e nts Boo k
* Class Audio CDs ’
* Workbook with Audio (with and without key) with DVD-ROM

WOX-GAG YM yoog ,Ssjuepnis

* Teacher’s Book with Resource and Assessment Disc

° ActiveTeach

Gseall 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 9

978-1-292-1159

Advanced
Upper Intermediate

Intermediate | |

Pre-intermediate

UOS]IM + 21k]

2ND
GLOBAL SCALE

EDITION of English

Elementary

Starter

NOSUVdd

Learn about the Global Scale of English at www.english.com/gse

ALWAYS LEARNING PEARSON

--- PAGE 2 ---

=
speakout 2»

Intermediate
Students’ Book

with DVD-ROM

[BI BIC)

Antonia Clare « JJ Wilson

--- PAGE 3 ---

GRAMMAR/FUNCTION VOCABULARY READING SPEAKING
UNIT! IDENTITY page7 ©) BBC interviews | What does family mean to you?

question forms

WRITING

Me and my language intonation: wh- questions read about bilingualism talk about important dates in your life write an email of introduction

languages page 8

Same or different? review of verb tenses relationships; collocations | word stress listen to a set of instructions and do a test talk about the differences beween men and

page 11 women

Tell me about talking about yourself interview advice intonation: sounding polite read tips on doing listen to three interviews role-play an interview

yourself page 14 successful interviews

The Blind Painter ay The Blind Painter: watch a BBC documentary speak about yourself for 60 seconds write a personal description
page 16 about a blind artist

UNIT 2 TALES page 19 ©) BBC interviews | When is it OK to tell a Lie?

y4)) Fact or fiction? present perfect and past types of story; prepositions | weak forms: have listen to a radio programme about films talk about life stories
page 20 simple

/¥7\ What really narrative tenses the news weak forms: had, was, were read an article about listen to news reports talk about an important news event write a news report
happened? conspiracy theories
page 23

1-5) | don’t believe it! telling a story say/tell intonation: sounding interested | read a text about lying listen to a woman telling a story tell a true story ora lie
page 26

7) Hustle ey Hustle: watch a BBC drama about an tell a narrative write a newspaper article
page 28 art thief

UNIT3 FUTURE page 3!

Making plans
page 32

®) BBC interviews | Can new technology help communication?

the future (plans) organisation fast speech: going to listen to people making plans discuss your plans and arrangements write a series of messages

read an article about the
future

Tomorrow's world the future (predictions) future time markers; idioms | stress in time markers
page 35

talk about predictions

In other words ... dealing with misunderstandings linking in connected speech
page 38 misunderstandings

listen to a series of misunderstandings explain misunderstandings

YouTube page 40 a YouTube: watch a BBC documentary about the discuss how to create a video channel

rise of YouTube

write a proposal

UNIT 4 JOBS page 43 &) BBC interviews | Is your job a ‘dream job’?

7) Millionaires must/have to/should personal qualities; fast speech: have to read an article about discuss how important becoming a millionaire
page 44 (obligation) confusing words millionaires is for you
7 %/)| Dream job used to, would extreme adjectives intonation: emphasis; read a covering letter listen to people describing dream jobs gone wrong talk about past habits write a covering letter
page 47 linking: used to
7% That's a good idea reaching agreement business sentence stress listen to people making decisions in a meeting participate in a meeting
page 50
7 ©") Gavin and Stacey aay Gavin and Stacey: watch a BBC comedy about describe a day in your life write about your daily routine
page 52 a man’s first day in a new job

UNIT5 SOLUTIONS page 55 %) BBC interviews | Are you good at solving problems?

I} Low tech solutions | comparatives and superlatives | technology syllable stress read about some low talk about inventions over the last 100 years write an advantages/disadvantages essay
page 56 technology solutions
Wy) Ask the experts question tags information; word building: | intonation: question tags read a book review listen to people answering difficult questions present and answer questions on your area of
page 59 adjectives expertise
Eye })] It’s out of order polite requests problems and solutions intonation: polite requests listen to conversations about technical problems explain/solve problems
page 62
7:4] Man versus Machine ey Top Gear: watch a BBC programme about a race present a new machine write an advertisement
page 64 between a car and two people

DVD-ROM: uty DVD CLIPS AND SCRIPTS BBC INTERVIEWS AND SCRIPTS ©) CLASS AUDIO AND SCRIPTS

--- PAGE 4 ---

UNIT6 EMOTION p

Feeling stressed?
page 68

GRAMMAR/FUNCTION

age 67
real conditionals

VOCABULARY

-ing/-ed adjectives;
multi-word verbs

©) BBC interviews | How are you feeling today?

weak forms: pronouns + ‘Il

READING

read about basic emotions

listen to a radio show about therapies

SPEAKING

talk about emotions

WRITING

The People Watchers
page 71

hypothetical conditional:
present/future

verb-noun collocations

connected speech: would

read about a BBC programme
The People Watchers

discuss what you would do in different
situations

write an email of advice

That's great news!
page 74

giving news

life events

intonation: giving bad news

read about good ways to give
bad news

listen to conversations where people hear news

give/respond to news

My Worst Week
page 76

=] My Worst Week: watch a BBC programme about

= a man’s terrible day

talk about memorable moments

write a website entry

UNIT7 SUCCESS pa

YA) The secret of
success page 80

ge79

present perfect simple versus
continuous

®) BBC interviews | What has been your

success; verb phrases

greatest achievement to date?

weak forms: have

listen to a radio programme about success

talk about success

¥//)\ The memory men present and past ability ability word stress read a biographical text listen to a conversation about memory talk about your abilities write a summary
page 83

Y-) Are you qualified? clarifying opinions qualifications stress patterns: short phrases read about three job candidates listen to a discussion about intelligence give/clarify opinions
page 86

Vf) Andy Murray pee Andy Murray: watch a BBC documentary about describe an achievement write an internet post
page 88 Andy Murray

UNIT8 COMMUNITIES page 9!

CAI) Neighbours

articles and quantifiers

getting on; compound

©) BBC interviews | What makes a good neighbour?

stress patterns: compound

read an article about neighbours

describe your neighbourhood

page 92 nouns nouns

(73) My place in relative clauses the internet pausing for effect read about the rise of YouTube listen to descriptions of online communities compare real-world and online activities write a website review
cyberspace page 95

(Be) Make yourself at being a good guest welcoming linking words listen to people describing guest/host experiences discuss social situations
home page 98

CP) Tribe wy Tribe: Anuta: watch a BBC documentary about a _| design a community write a web advert
page 100 remote community

UNIT 9 HISTORY pag:

e 103

®) BBC interviews | Do you think Life is better now than in the past?

yA |) Giant leaps
page 104

hypothetical conditional: past

history

word stress: contractions

read about important
moments in history

talk about important events in history

write a short essay

¢y) In our time

active versus passive

periods of time;

weak forms: are, has been, was

read about time travel

listen to descriptions of past decades

talk about your own history

page 107 collocations and were

+5] | have no idea! expressing uncertainty describing people intonation: showing interest read a quiz about famous listen to people doing a quiz about famous people compile and do a quiz
page 110 people in history in history

+) Michelangelo a The Divine Michelangelo: watch a BBC describe a person who influenced you write a wiki entry
page 112 documentary about the life and work of

Michelangelo Buonarroti

UNIT 10 WORLD page | 15

®) BBC interviews | What are the biggest problems facing the world today?

ON) Ethical man

reported speech

the environment;

weak forms: auxiliary verbs

read about a man who tried

discuss ideas for reducing plastic waste

page 116 word building: prefixes to live ethically for a year
(0) World food verb patterns reporting verbs weak forms: to, for, that listen to descriptions of the world’s best food cities recommend a city for food write a restaurant review
page 119

iF When you travel, .... | giving advice/warnings airports individual sounds: vowels read advice about what not listen to people giving advice/warnings ask for/give travel advice
page 122 to do in an airport

P) The Great Melt a] Nature's Great Events: The Great Melt: watch talk about an endangered place write an email campaigning for action
page 124 a BBC documentary about the Arctic’s melting

ice caps

--- PAGE 5 ---

)) LEAD IN

GRAMMAR |

L Read the text and find examples of ...
1 the past simple he saw

the past continuous

the present perfect

the past perfect

a modal verb

a superlative

a relative clause

a passive

ONAU RWN

There have been some amazing coincidences
throughout history, but this might be the best.
In 1900 King Umberto of Italy was dining ina
restaurant when he saw that the owner looked
exactly like him. The man, who was also called
Umberto, was born in Turin on the same day as
the king and, like the king, married a woman
called Margherita. Amazingly, their weddings
had been on the same day. The king invited the
restaurant owner to an athletics meeting the
next day. As the king sat down, he was told
that the other Umberto had died in a mysterious
shooting accident. Just as the king heard this
news, an anarchist shot him dead.

PRONUNCIATION i

2 A Find pairs of words that have the same

vowel sound.
bar White
EN j
YW
ee .
s Sx
fy
5 3
uo o
£ 2
3 =
»X, Po)
% &
2
&
S35 ae
Mo mn yoo}

B [)L1 Listen and check your answers.

C Work in pairs. Think of other words in English
that use the same sounds.

VOCABULARY I

3A Complete the common phrases below using the
correct verb from the box.

have take check watch chat go meet
play do (x2)

1 _have_ameeting 6 some work

2 your email 7 on the internet
3 out withfriends 8 a break

4 some sport 9 ~~ aDVD

5 a colleague 10 some music

B Add phrases 1-10 above to the word webs below.

have a meeting

C Can you add any more phrases to the word webs?
Which of these things do you do on a normal day?

COMMON ERRORS

4 A Correct the mistakes.
AK She likes listening music.
“B lamarchitect. wel)
Are you 1 feeling attight?
hen | can visit your house?
. Let’ discuss abqut this tomorrow.
& He t come here often.
ermany
“K We come from germany.
8, Wher ver go yesterday?
g) Ive in in this town all my life.
10 My wife is a really good c

B Which mistakes are connected with ...
a) verb-noun agreement 6

b) spelling -7 §

c) verb tense

a) punctuation/capitalisation a
»e) prepositions —~7

articles

“BY vocabulary &

hy) word order

7h missing auxiliary verb 3

fi extra words S

--- PAGE 6 ---

Aw HS

ME AND MY LANGUAGES p8 SAME OR DIFFERENT pl! TELL ME ABOUT YOURSELF p14 / THE BLIND PAINTER pl6

SPEAKING 1.1 Talk about important dates in your Life 1.2 Talk about the differences |B | |B |

between men and women I.3 Role-play an interview 1.4 Speak about

yourself for 60 seconds INTERVIEWS
LISTENING 1.2 Listen toa set of instructions and do atest 1.3 Listen to three interviews ©) What does family

1.4 Watch a BBC documentary about a blind artist mean to you?
READING — 1.1 Read about bilingualism 1.3 Read tips on doing successful interviews Ko

WRITING 1.1 Write an email of introduction 1.4 Write a personal description

--- PAGE 7 ---

1.1) MEAND MY LANGUAGES Qn!

VOCABULARY

LANGUAGE

1 A Read questions 1-10. What do the words in bold
mean? Check with other students or your teacher,
then think about your answers to the questions.

1 Why are you learning English? For work, exams,
travel, etc.?

2 Do you speak any languages apart from your
mother tongue and English?

3 Who is the best language learner in your family?

4 Did you use any learning strategies when
studying your second language? Which?

5 When was the first time you used a foreign
language outside the classroom?

6 Do you have the chance to speak/write to
native speakers regularly?

7 Is it important for you to learn slang or jargon
in English, or do you only want to learn standard
English?

8 Which is more important to you when you learn to
speak a language: fluency or accuracy?

9 Which skill is the hardest for you: speaking,
listening, reading, or writing? Which is the easiest?

10 Do you know anyone who is bilingual? What

advantages might they have in life?

B Work in groups. Discuss your answers to
questions 1-10.

2 Answer the questions.
1 Which words in bold in questions 1-10 have silent
letters?
2 What are the silent letters in these words: science,
talk, listen, know, right, wrong, hours, guess?
3 Which statement (a or b) do you think is true?
a Most words in English are spelt differently to
how they are pronounced.
b Under twenty percent of words in English are
spelt differently to how they are pronounced.

=>
speakout TIP

Around fourteen percent of English words have irregular

spelling; they are spelt differently to how they are
pronounced. When you learn new words, try to hear them.
Watch out for silent letters!

CP) intonation: Wh- questions

(Vv) language
Le Zz,

BILINGUALS:
EXOTIC BIRDS
OR EVERYDAY
PEOPLE?

by Johan Acosta

randpa shouts, “Dinner’s ready”

in Danish. My mother asks me in

English to lay the table. As I do
so, I catch the theme tune of the Brazilian
soap opera on TV in the living room, where
my sister is relaxing. She speaks perfect
Portuguese. My father asks her to record
the programme in his native Spanish, and
we take our places at the table. And what's
on the menv? Italian meatballs.

We know we aren’t a normal family. At
any moment, you might hear conversations
in four different languages, and almost
everyone understands almost everything.
But what is normal these days? My mother
is half-Danish, half-English, and my father,
who is from Bolivia, speaks Spanish and
Guarani. Because of my mother’s work
(she’s now retired), we lived in Brazil, Italy
and Germany, so we picked up three more
languages. Now as adults, my sister and I
both speak six languages.

3 A Read the title of the text. What do you think it
will discuss? Read to find out.

B Read the text again and answer the questions.

1 What six languages do you think the writer and his
sister speak?

2 How do you think the writer learnt each of his
languages?

3 How many of the world’s people are thought to be
bilingual?

4 What are those who learn their second language
as children better at compared to those who learn
a second language as adults?

5 What health benefit of being bilingual is
mentioned in the text?

--- PAGE 8 ---

Being bilingual, or in our case multilingual, has
so many advantages. All the recent research suggests
we benefit in many ways: social, cultural, economic,
academic, and intellectual. The research has also destroyed
some of those persistent myths.

One of the myths is that bilingualism is uncommon,
as if we bilinguals are like rare, exotic birds. The truth is
that around fifty percent of the world’s inhabitants are
bilingual. The continents with the most linguistic diversity
are Asia and Africa. In Nigeria alone, 500 languages are
spoken, in India 400.

Some people believe that you have to learn both
languages as a child to be truly bilingual. My sister and I
are fortunate in this respect, but we know countless people
who have mastered a second language as adults. They
may not have such perfect pronunciation as those who
acquire their second language as children, but they are still
completely fluent and accurate.

Another myth about bilinguals concerns identity. Some
people think we have split personalities. As kids, my sister
and I were often asked “But where are you really from?
Don’t you get confused?” Not at all. 1 am me, the product
of many cultures. I can switch languages easily, according
to where I am and who I’m with, and this seems completely
natural to me.

As for the benefits, bilinguals do better on certain
tests, are better protected against mental illnesses such
as Alzheimer’s, gain insights into other cultures, have
access to more of the world’s information, and are in some
contexts more employable. Being bilingual has made me
who I am, and for that I’m grateful.

é One of the myths is that
bilingualism is uncommon,
as if we bilinguals are like

rare, exotic birds. 9

C Underline words or phrases in the text that
match meanings 1-6 below.

1 relating to the language you grew up speaking
paragraph 1)

2. learnt by listening/watching other people
(paragraph 2)

3 speaking many languages (paragraph 3)

4 false ideas that people continue to believe and
repeat (paragraph 3)

5 learn without needing to try hard, e.g. a language
paragraph 5)

6 understand important truths about a subject
paragraph 7)

D Discuss the questions with other students.

1 Do you agree with the writer's list of the
advantages to being bilingual?

2 Do you think there any disadvantages to being
bilingual?

3 Do you know any families that are bilingual or
multilingual? Are they similar to the family in the
text?

GRAMMAR ij

QUESTION FORMS

4 A Read sentences 1-6 and answer questions a)-e).

1 Do you speak other languages?

Did you use any learning strategies?

Who did you talk to?

What happened?

What did you talk about?

Who is the best language learner in your family?

aAuRWN

a) Underline the main verb in each question. (The
first has been done for you.)

b) Circle the auxiliary verbs. Which auxiliary refers to
the past? Which refers to the present?

c) Which two questions are yes/no questions?

d) Which two questions end in a preposition: of, by, etc.?
e) Which two questions use wh- words to refer to the
subject (the person who does the action, or the

action itself) and don’t use an auxiliary verb?

[> page 128 LANGUAGEBANK

B 1) 1-1) INTONATION: wh- questions Listen to the
questions in Exercise 4A. Are the question words
(wh- words) in 3-6 said in a higher or a lower voice?

C Listen and say the questions at the same time.

5 A Put the words in the correct order to make

questions. bo you stydy every day?

1 do / every / ou / day / stud ? ther | >

2 your / Sit Yeprietts.gach Sach Parents) you oes
/ other? Who is the best language learner you know?
i ?

> is(tearnet/ yuh fide cea (Yeu clanauage/ know 7

4 was/ teacher / your English 7 first / who ?

5 do/do/ you / remember / what / English / to /

words / in? What languages do you like to listening

6 languages / you / what / do / tg / like / listening ?
7 do aR EITSTER Me PENSE Yu PRR TY
ProgramMesiyhen did you speak a foreign language first
8 foreign / did / speak / first / when / language /a/
you ?

B Choose three of the questions to ask other
students.

6 A write four dates, four names and four places

that are important to you.

Dates: 7 May 2008 - My son was born.

Names:

Places:

B Work in groups. Take turns to explain what

you wrote. As you listen, think of questions to ask
afterwards.

--- PAGE 9 ---

WRITING

EMAILS OF INTRODUCTION; LEARN TO WRITE
FORMAL AND INFORMAL EMAILS
2 A When would you write a letter or email to introduce yourself?

B Read the emails. Why are the people writing? Which sentences
tell us?

9 A Look at the emails in Exercise 7B

again. Which one is formal and which
is informal? How do you know?

B Answer questions 1-4 with formal

(F) or informal (I).

1 Which email uses full forms of
verbs (I will, | would) instead of
contractions (you're, I'd)?

To ramirezh@languagestar.nett Subject | Spanish conversation class 2 Which email leaves out words (e g
Hi Hernan, Hope to ... instead of | hope to ...)?
My name's Julia Brown. | heard from my friend Nichola Lazarus that 3 Which email sounds more like
you're running a Spanish conversation class. She said you'd be happy spoken English?

‘0 accept a few more people. My mother tongue is English but | picked 4 Which email uses longer, more

up some Spanish years ago when | was travelling in Latin America.

really want to develop my fluency and accuracy, so I'd love to join
he class. Hope to hear from you soon.

All the best,

ulia @

To [GND staff Subject ( Greetings

Dear Colleagues,

As you probably know, next month | will start work as the new director
of the Language Teaching Education Programme. For those of you

who don't know me, | would like to take this opportunity to introduce
myself. Since 2010, | have worked at the School of Education at Borodive
University. | have been involved in a number of language teacher
education projects across Europe and | worked extensively on the Star
Placement Initiative that placed six thousand native speakers in language
classrooms in eight countries. | am married with two children and my
family is bilingual in English and Turkish.

| look forward to working with you.

Yours sincerely,

Talya Osman

8 Read the five steps for good email writing. Do you think

the emails in Exercise 7B follow steps 1-3?

1 Aim for your audience: think about who you are writing to.
Is the email formal or informal?

2 Be brief: try not to use too many words. Emails shouldn't go
on for pages.

3 Communicate clearly: use simple, clear language and simple
sentence structure.

4 Do two drafts: write a first version and then rewrite.
5 Edit everything: check grammar, vocabulary, spelling and
punctuation before sending.

complex sentences?

C Complete the notes with phrases
from the email.
| Greeting
(formal): : .
(informal): Hi/Hello.

Introduction

(formal): | would like to take
this 2

(informal): My names...

Final message

(formal): | look forward to...

(informal): 7

Goodbye
(formal): 4 .
(informal): All the best.

10 choose a situation below and write

an email. Think about who you are
writing to, the reason for writing and
the style: formal or informal.

Situation 1

You are going to join an English
conversation class. Write an

email introducing yourself to the
teacher and the class. Mention your
experience of learning and speaking
English and say why you want to join
the class.

Situation 2

Next week you start a new job in

a multinational company. Your
colleagues speak over twenty
languages, and all of them read
English. Write to introduce yourself.
Mention your previous work
experience and the languages you
know, and add something personal.

--- PAGE 10 ---

SAME OR DIFFERENT? oS

@ word stress
@ relationships; collocations

VOCABULAR | LISTENING

RELATIONSHIPS

3 A Read the text. Discuss. Do you think male and female brains
are different? How? What are the stereotypes of men and

L A Workin pairs. Think of all the people ,
women in your country?

you have talked to in the last 24 hours.
What relationship do they have to you? y o—=— 28

B Look at the words in the box and
answer the questions.

bessancemptoyee classmates

partner team-mates member
godfather and godmother
mentor and pupil fiancée and fiancé

1 Which pair works together? boss and
employee
2 Which pair promises to help guide a
child through life?
3 Which pair is going to get married? V?
4 Which pair involves one person }
learning from the other?
5 Which word describes people who play
in the same sports team?
6 Which word describes people who go
to the same class? 1
7 Which word describes a person who is

part of a club? Are men’s and women’s brains

8 Which word is a general word for

Eeene oyu cosoneni wired differently?

C [B12 Listen to six sentences. Tick Is it true that men are from Venus and women are from Mars?
the words in the box in Exercise 1B | Some researchers think that male and female brains are
which you hear. > wired differently, with male brains wired from back to front,

and female brains wired from side to side. This might explain
why men are good at performing a single task, like cycling or
navigating, whereas women might be better at multi-tasking.
Other researchers disagree, however. What do YOU think?
Try the bike test to find out if your brain is male or female.

D worD STRESS Six of the words

have two syllables. Find the words and
underline the stressed syllable. Say the
words aloud, putting the stress on the
correct syllable.

[> page 148 VOCABULARYBANK = 2 = 22
—_
speakout TIP B })13 Take a piece of paper. Listen to Part 1 and 2 and
Gaaawaiap. muaaw non mdlehiaanaediaia follow the bike test instructions.
Remember: most two-syllable words in
English have the stress on the first syllable. C ()14 Listen to the explanation in Part 3. Turn to page
Hold a hand under your chin. Say the word 158 and check your picture. How many parts did your bike
slowly. The jaw (the bottom part of your have? Could it work? Does it have a person on it? Compare your
chin) drops more on the stressed syllable. picture with other students’.
D Discuss the questions.

2 Work in groups. Discuss the questions. 1 Was the explanation correct for you?

1 Can you think about one man and one 2 Do you agree with the presenter’s views about men and women?

woman who have played important
roles in your life? Who were they? Why
was the relationship important?

2 Do you think men and women are
different in these roles? How?

4 4 Women think people are important. Men, on the other hand,
are more interested in getting the machine right. 5 5

--- PAGE 11 ---

4 A Read the information. Which comments do you

agree/disagree with? Can you think of any opinions

to add?

Are men & women
really different?

We asked for comments iv)
and this is what you said. e

—ew

“Absolutely! Men can’t watch
sport on TV and talk to their
girlfriend at the same time.”

“WOMEN DON’T KNOW

Ee

READ MAPS.”

OL MO

“Women remember every outfit  —
they’ve worn for the past twenty

years. Men can’t remember «4 ~
what they were wearing yesterday

without looking on the floor.”

“Men can buy a pair of
shoes on the internet in

90 seconds.
Women like to take
three weeks.”

“A baby is crying, a dog is barking,

a doorbell is ringing, but the man of the
house is sleeping. Men can sleep
through anything. Women can’t.”

“Men speak in sentences.
Women speak in

paragraphs.”

B Do the men and women in your life conform to
the normal stereotypes? Why?/Why not?

GRAMMAR

REVIEW OF VERB TENSES

5 A Match the underlined verbs below with the

tenses a)-d).

1 We asked for comments and this is what you said.

2 Men can’t remember what they were wearing
yesterday.

3 Women remember every outfit they’ve worn for
the past twenty years.

4 Ababy is crying.

a) present simple

b) present continuous

c) past simple

d) past continuous

B Complete the rules with the correct tenses a)-d).

1 We use for actions, events or
situations that are finished.

2 We use for things that are going on
at a particular moment in the present.

3 We use for habits, routines and
things that are always true.

4 We use when someone was in the
middle of an action at a particular moment in
the past.

sand

C Read about state verbs. Underline three
examples in the text above.

2 Some verbs are not usually used in the
bs continuous, e.g. want, like, remember,
® | understand, know. These are called ‘state verbs’.

[> page 128 LANGUAGEBANK

6 A Read the text below and put the words in
brackets into the correct tense.

My name is Matsuko Tamazuri. | am twenty-three
and|! am (be) a student. | study
French and Spanish at university in Osaka, where
|? grew up (grow up), but at the
moment |?__ learn (learn) English in
New York. When | first 4 got (get)
here, everything®__ seemed (seem)
different: the food, the clothes and the weather.
Now | ¢ engoying (enjoy) it and it

feels like home! | have a boyfriend called Josh.

[7 met (meet) him three weeks ago
when | ®__was looking (look) for an internet
café! My hobbies ° were (be) surfing
the net and singing. | 7° sin (sing)
every day, usually in the bathroom!

B Work in pairs. Ask questions and write your
partner's personal profile. Use the profile above
to help.

--- PAGE 12 ---

VOCABULARY / 80K)

COLLOCATIONS

? A Workin pairs and do the quiz.

B Turn to page 158 and read the text to check your

answers.

8 A Look at the quiz again. Find and circle five
expressions using take, get, do and go.

B Write the expressions in italics in the correct
places in the word webs below.

1 onediet, home, off something, for a drink/a walk/
a meal, grey
ona diet (start something)

= (become)
foradrink/ a (move toa place)

(other expressions)

2 responsibility for, after someone, part in something,
a taxi a taxi

go ina vehicle)
part in something

join in)
phrasal verbs)

(
(
(
(other expressions)

3 married, a job/degree, on with someone, here

married (become)
Co ) get a job/degregobtain)
__here (go somewhere)

(phrasal verbs)

4 exercise, research, housework, someone a favour
exercise (activity)

research

find information)
someone a favo!

t
(help someone)

(do) housework (responsibilities and tasks)
(
u

[> page 148 VOCABULARYBANK

SPEAKING !

9 A Think about your classmates. Write down the
name of someone who:
* never gets angry.
* does research for his/her job.
* tooka test in the last six months.
* went fora meal last weekend.
* took up a new hobby recently.
* always gets here early.
* went fora walk today.
* got a new job recently.

B Work in groups. Ask the other students to check
if they agree with your ideas.

Oreragd a

think -o®

Stella magazine commissioned YouGoy, a research
agency, to interview over |,000 women in the UK
about everything from their eating habits to their
relationships and family values, to find out what they
really think.

How do you think they responded?

How many women in the UK would prefer
to have a male boss?
a) less than 30% b) about 50% c) over 70%

How many women spend more than seven
hours a week doing exercise?

a) 4% b) 15% c) 30%

What is the biggest challenge for women
today?

a) staying healthy b) making enough money

cc) balancing home and work life

What do women think is the best age to
get married?

a) between 2! and 24 b) between 25 and 29

c) over 30

What do 59% of women think fathers
should take more responsibility for?

a) their children b) doing the housework

¢) organising holidays

According to women, how much
housework do they do?

a) more than 50% b) over 75% c) nearly all of it

How many women aged 45-54 met their
husbands through the internet?
a) 1% b)9% c) 16%

How many women have gone on a diet
in the past?
a) 20% b) between 35% and 45% cc) over 50%

--- PAGE 13 ---

1.3 )) TELLME ABOUT YOURSELF

1 A Lookat the photos. What types of interview

could this be? Choose from the list below.

* job interview

¢ interview for a place at university

* newspaper/magazine interview

+ interview for a talk show/radio programme

* placement interview for a language course

B Look at the list of interview types above. Answer

questions 1-3.

1 Which types of interview above have you
experienced?

2 Which will you experience in the future?

3 Do you think it is possible to show ‘the real you’ in
a short interview? Why?/Why not?

CF) talking about yourself
@ intonation: sounding polite
iv) interview advice

Tips to help you do well
at interviews

niversity or the job of
the interview, you might
ttention. The Dean of

4]

How do you get into the u
your dreams? Even before
catch someones a

pene at Harvard University says he see
receives flowers and chocolates from potentia
students. One student sent references every day
for three months. Eventually, he even sent a letter
from his dentist saying how nice his teeth were.
He didn’t get an interview.

For those of you who do make the interview stage,
here are five top tips:

1 Be prepared. Do some research about the university
or company so you know what questions to ask.

2 Dress appropriately. You don't have to dress smartly
but you should look clean. And don't wear ‘bling’
(large pieces of jewellery).

3 Arrive on time. Fifteen minutes early is OK.

& Shake hands firmly and make eye contact. First
impressions are important.

5 Speak clearly and try to offer full answers rather than
short responses. This shows your enthusiasm.

VOCABULARY

INTERVIEW ADVICE

2 A Workin pairs. What should/shouldn’t you do

in an interview? Think of as many things as you
can in two minutes.
You should try to ask questions.

B Look at topics 1-3 below and match them
to the expressions in the box.

dress smartly 3 speak clearly answer briefly
shake hands firmly send references

arrive on time avoid eye contact be prepared
do some research show enthusiasm

1 Should do during an interview
2 Shouldn't do during an interview
3 Might do before an interview

3 Read the text and answer the questions.

1 What type of things do some people do to get an
interview at Harvard University?

2 According to the text, what should you do before
and during an interview? Do you agree with the
advice?

--- PAGE 14 ---

FUNCTION i

TALKING ABOUT YOURSELF

4 A b)1.5° Listen to three extracts from interviews and answer
the questions.
1 What types of interview are they?
2 Which interviewee doesn’t follow the five tips? What does
he/she do wrong?

B Answer questions 1-6. Listen again to check.

Interview 1

1 What does the student want to practise?

2 What types of classes are in the afternoons?
Interview 2

3 What did the girl organise on the summer camp?

4 What ‘can be difficult’ according to the interviewer?
Interview 3

5 What does the man want to know?

6 Why are online courses more difficult than face-to-face courses,
according to the interviewer?

5 A Read the extracts from the interviews. Underline the
expressions that introduce a question.
Extract 1
T: OK ... Is there anything else?
S: Could | ask a question?
Extract 2
I: There are a couple of things I'd like to ask about. Your CV says
you have some experience of looking after children?
A: Yes, | was a tutor on a summer camp last year.
I: Can | ask you about that? What type of things did you do?

Extract 3
I: | think that’s about it. Do you have any questions? Any queries?
S: Um, yes, actually | do have a query.

B Read the extracts below and underline the expressions that
are used to introduce an opinion.

Extract 1

S: I've ... spent time in Britain, but that was a few years ago. So for.
me the most important thing is to just refresh ...

Extract 2

I: OK. And you enjoyed it?

A: Yes.

I: What aspect, what part did you enjoy, would you say?

A: | suppose I'd have to say | liked the games best ...

I: ... We often find that different ages together can be difficult.

A: It depends. In my opinion, you can usually get the older children
to help the younger ones.

Extract 3

S: So | wouldn't need to attend classes?

I: Not for the online courses. But ... well, one thing I'd like to say
is that the online courses are, in many ways, more difficult than
face-to-face courses.

[> page 128 LANGUAGEBANK

One thing r§ Gk to'Say Li f is Hat eat

6 Put the words in the correct order to

mak Ss ntences on uestions.
do have a ry!

1 | h dc
query / 7a) have ave /{ () ka question

Thée dB 5 cauleid veatiehe hash H9. isk about
3 like / couple / of / aré / about /
things / to/a/as / ther,
4 ask/you/|/can oe
5 eee opinion ha

RPO that
uk isisn't true
ee say | agree

urse Ms to ifficult
ing t at Tone / sy is
For me the ne fH9st ib f offen filg f oat

? ing fmportant / most Yor /

the / me / to / study

LEARN TO |

USE TWO-WORD RESPONSES

? A Match expressions 1-5 with
expressions a)-e).
1 Of course.
2 That's right.
3 Isee.
4 No problem.
5 Go ahead.

a) Please continue.
b) You're correct.
c) You're welcome.
d) Yes, definitely.
) | understand.

B Which expressions in Exercise 7A
are more formal? Read audio script
1.5 on page 164 to see how the
expressions are used.

C (2) 6) intonation: sounding
i Listen to the expressions in
Exercise 7A. Notice how the speaker
begins the expression with a high
pitch to sound friendly. Listen again
and repeat.

8 Role-play an interview in pairs.

Follow instructions 1-5.

1 Either choose one of the interview
types in Exercise 1A, or Student A:
turn to page 158 and Student B:
turn to page 162.

2 Decide on your roles.

3 Interviewer: think of questions.
You can make notes if you wish.
Interviewee: guess what type of
questions the interviewer will ask
and prepare answers.

4 Practise your role-play.

5 Perform it in front of other
students.

--- PAGE 15 ---

) THE BLIND PAINTER

Work in pairs and discuss the questions.

1 What creative or sporting activities are important
to you? How would you feel if you couldn't do
them any more?”

2 Which creative or sporting activities would be
particularly difficult if you were blind? What
problems do you think a blind person would have?

Read about the programme. What caused Sargy
Mann to go blind? What happened after he went
totally blind?

The Blind Painter fia
Sargy Mann painted all of his professional life,
first as a teacher and later as a professional
artist. In his mid-30s he developed cataracts
on both eyes, eventually leading to total
blindness. He continued to paint. Twenty-five
years later, Sargy’s work was very popular with
art collectors, with paintings regularly selling
for more than £50,000 (US$80,000). He spoke
to BBC News about his life and how he
continued to work.

Watch the DVD. What does Sargy use to help him
paint? What do you think of his paintings?

Answer the questions.
1 What do you know about Sargy Mann after
watching the clip?
2 Why did Sargy start to paint again after he went
blind?
3 How does he use Blu-Tack to help him paint?
4 Who buys his artwork?
Look at the quotes from the DVD. Try to
complete the phrases using the words in the box.

sensation go edgy coordinates landscape
nonsense

1 The idea of painting when you were totally blind
seemed a to me.

2 | wonder what would happen if | give that
a :

3 | had the most extraordinary

4 Pre total blindness, | would say | was a
painter.

5 Now the thing about these bits of Blu-Tack of
course is that what they are actually is

6 They are , dangerous. They tell stories,
they're full of impact through colour.

Watch the DVD again to check your answers.

Match the words and expressions from Exercise
3B with a)-f) below.
a) a very strange or unusual feeling
b) an artist who paints the countryside and scenery
c) experimental or avant-garde
d) numbers or information used to indicate a point
e) looked like a silly idea
f) (to) try something

Discuss the questions.

1 Do you think that Sargy Mann would have been
such a successful artist if he was not blind?

2 Can you think of other people who have achieved

great things despite physical disabilities?

--- PAGE 16 ---

cout 60 seconds about you

. [J 1.7 Listen to Monica talking about herself.
Which questions does she answer from the
questionnaire below? What does she say?

Who are you?

What three words best describe you?

What is your idea of perfect happiness?

What possession is most important to you?

What is your greatest achievement?

What do you like most/least about your lifestyle?
What is your favourite sound, smell and taste?
What do you always carry with you?

Who would be your perfect dinner date? Why?
What's your favourite month and why?

If you could change one thing about the past,
what would it be?

Co ON JAI /UY Re &w YF

re.
o

} Listen again. Complete the phrases Monica uses.

PHRASES
I'm going to tell you about myself.
| think three words that describe me would
be , talkative and hard-working.
One of the things | about my lifestyle ...
| suppose that’s one | don't like.
In the summer, | love to to the coast ...
It makes me feel

oe

back apersonal description

, Read the text. What do you think are Stephan’s

main achievements?

Stephan Wilding in 100 words:

Stephan decided to change his degree from

pharmacology to studying Thai at the School of Oriental

Studies in London. When he finished university, he
spent six months in Thailand teaching English before
coming back to the UK. Unsure of his next move, he
spent his evenings and weekends teaching himself
how to code. He then got together with some friends
to start up their own software business. It was a huge
adventure and they learnt a lot very quickly. They have

C Prepare to talk about yourself for 60 seconds.
Choose two or three questions from the
questionnaire in Exercise 5A. Plan your answers.
Practise and time your presentation to check you
can say it all in just 60 seconds.

J Work in pairs and take turns to give your
presentation. Take notes on your partner's
presentation. What do you have in common?

recently won a contract to build a computer platform
for a design company, so the future is looking good.

B Work in pairs. You are going to write a short
description of your partner. Check your notes
from Exercise 5D and ask your partner questions
if you think you need more information. Then
use the text in Exercise 6A to help you write your
description(100 words).

--- PAGE 17 ---

1.5 (¢ LOOKBACK

@ LANGUAGE

1 A Read the advice from a 1950's English course book.

© REVIEW OF VERB TENSES

4 A Find and correct the mistakes. Five of the

Complete the sentences with the words in the box.

foreign strategy jargon bilingual
native speakers flteney slang accuracy
skill mother tongue

1 Using the right method, fluency _ in the target
language is possible after just a few weeks.

2 Students should talk with only.
Exposure to other learners will result in new errors.

3 To improve , the student should copy out
several pages from the textbook every day.

4 The student's biggest problem is translating every
word of English into his .

5 The best is for the student to imitate the
recordings for an hour at a time.

6 It is unnecessary to learn words unless the
learner needs them for a specific job.

7 Itis impossible to become unless the
second language was learnt in childhood.

8 Students should avoid because it isn’t
proper English.

9 To improve the listening , the student
should listen daily to the radio.

10 The student needs to be corrected every

time he makes a mistake.

B Which advice is still useful? Change any advice you
disagree with. Compare your ideas with a partner.

© QUESTION FORMS

2 A Find and correct the mistakes in the questions
below. Four of the questions are correct.
1 When you started studying English?
Who did helped you to learn English?
What annoys you about your job or your studies?
Did you to learn anything important at school?
Do you be enjoy learning languages?
In your job or studies, is there anything you are
not happy with?

7 When you imagine the perfect career, what do you
think of?

8 What keeps you awake at night?

au nRWN

B Ask your partner four of the questions.

© RELATIONSHIPS J

3 A Put the letters in the correct order to find the
names of twelve types of people.

1 tomdogher 5 ceanife 9 sobs

2 niface 6 breemm 10 emeyloep
3 ilupp 7 stamcasel 11 trenom
4 nraterp 8 dethagorf 12 maatteme

B Work in pairs. Which of these people do you
know or have in your life? Which of these are you?

underlined verbs are incorrect.

121009 saw

| ‘was walking to work this morning when | @was seeing

Mr Gonzalez, my old Spanish teacher. He >was wearing a
leather jacket, a — ing a guitar. ABKE im how he was.
He said, Fine ROBIN, band practice. | said, ‘What band?’
He replied, ‘| °don't teach any d ‘wasnt really the best
job for me. A few years ago | ®was starting a band callgq;
The Big Easy. We °dont make much money, but | ''m liking
the lifestyle’ | asked him where he lived and he said, ‘| “m_
living in my caravan at the moment. | “travel a lot. I'm a child
of the sixties!’

B Write a short diary entry about an interesting or
unusual day.

@ TALKING ABOUT YOURSELF

5A Complete the conversations. Write an expression

from the box in the correct place in the sentence.

quieryabeut like to tosay youabout | ask
thing I'd

query about
1 A: | have a/the class. Do | have to bring a pen?
B: No, it’s a computer class.
2 A: Could a question? Where does the tennis class
meet?
B: At the tennis courts.
3 A: I'd have I’m not sure you're qualified. Why
should we employ you for the library position?
B: Because I’m good with children and animals.
4 A: There are a couple of things I'd ask. Firstly, can
you work on Saturdays?
B: Is that at the weekend?
5 A: One like to say is that you look good for your
age. How old are you?
B: Thirty.
6 A: Can! ask your latest film, Philadelphia? Where is
it set?
B: In Philadelphia.

B Work in pairs. Write an interview (a job, a
place on a course, a magazine interview). Use the
expressions in Exercises 5 and 7 on page 15 to help.

C Workin groups and take turns to role-play your
interviews.

--- PAGE 18 ---

SPEAKING

LISTENING

READING
WRITING

2.1 Talk about life stories 2.2 Talk about an important news event |B | |B |
2.3 Tell a true story oralie 2.4 Tell a narrative

2.1 Listen to a radio programme about films 2.2 Listen to news reports INTERVIEWS
2.3 Listen to a woman telling a story 2.4 Watcha BBC drama about ©) Whenis it ok to
an art thief tell a lie?

2.2 Read an article about conspiracy theories; 2.3 Read a text about lying Kon

rs 3

2.2 Write anews report 2.4 Write a newspaper article

--- PAGE 19 ---

2.1

FACT OR FICTION?

Can you tell your facts from fiction?

1 A Workin groups and discuss. Can you think of a
film you have seen that has taught you about a
person/event in history?

B Work in pairs and do the quiz. Decide if the
information is fact, fiction or partly true. Then
check your answers on page 158.

C Discuss. Do you think it is all right for film-makers
to change the facts of a story? Why?/Why not?

In the film The Last Samurai, Tom Cruise plays a US army
captain who joins the samurai warriors in Japan in 1876.
Was Captain Nathan Algren a real figure from history?

2 In Shakespeare in Love, William Shakespeare is inspired to
write Romeo and Juliet by his real-life relationship with a
young actress. Did this happen in real life?

3 In the film Braveheart, Mel Gibson plays the character :

William Wallace, leading an army of men with painted faces, ©
and wearing kilts* as he battles to free Scotland from the
English. How much truth is there in the story?
In the 1995 adventure, Apollo 13, we hear the pilot saying
the famous words ‘Houston, we have a problem.’ But were
these his exact words? g

* kilt - a type of skirt traditionally worn by Scottish men g

VOCABULARY

TYPES OF STORY

2 A Lookat the types of film stories in the box below.
Match the types of story with the descriptions a)-i).

abiopic adocudrama a disaster movie
aromantic comedy a period drama

a fantasy film a science fiction film

a psychological thriller an action/adventure film
amystery acrime film

a) Heroes chase and fight each other.

b) The main character has mental problems.

c) Astory about the science of the future.

d) Things that happen in the life of a real person.

e) The good guy (the detective) finds the bad guy

the criminal).

f) People dressed up in old-fashioned costumes.

g) Funny things happen. Two people fall in love.

h) Terrible things happen, but people survive.

i) A documentary made more interesting with some
parts acted.

j) Strange things happen in an imaginary world.

k) Somebody gets murdered and a clever detective
tries to find out who did it.

=

(G) present perfect and past simple
CP) weak forms: have
(Vv) types of story; prepositions

B Read the opinion below. What type of films does
the writer enjoy? Why?

G G1 love watching romantic comedies. I enjoy
sitting down and watching a couple find each other
and fall in love. It’s really easy watching. I find it
relaxing because I don't have to think. It's funny how
my taste in films has changed. When I was younger
I enjoyed action films, like Terminator 2. But now I
guess my interests are different. yb]

C Work in pairs and answer the questions.
1 Which types of film do you enjoy watching?
Have your tastes changed over the years?

2 Can you name films which match each type of
story? Have both of you seen them? Are your
opinions about them the same or different?

LISTENING

2.1 Listen to the first part of a radio
programme about films and answer the questions.
1 What type of film does the programme talk about?
2 Why are these films so popular?

B Work in pairs and discuss. Look at the photos of
actors who have played the roles of famous people in
films. How do you think they prepared for the roles?

2 Listen to the second part of the radio
programme. Are the sentences true (T) or false (F)?
1 Helen Mirren won an Oscar for her role as the Queen.
2 Will Smith met Muhammad Ali but they didn’t get on.
3 Josh Brolin talked to himself in a Texan accent all day.
4 Audrey Tautou watched films of Coco Chanel.

4a Diz Listen to the whole programme and
complete the information.

1 Hollywood has always used in
its films.
2 Hollywood began making films in the s.
3 Some of the best films in recent years have been
based on ;

4 From these films we've learnt about the
lives of some of the biggest music legends.

5 Many of these actors have won for their
roles.

6 Helen Mirren met the Queen for

7 Josh Brolin phoned hotels in Texas, to listen to
their

8 Tautou wanted to look like Coco Chanel, so that
we would recognise her

B Check your answers in the audio script on

page 164.

--- PAGE 20 ---

GRAMMAR

PRESENT PERFECT AND PAST SIMPLE

5 A Read the sentences in Exercise 4A and underline examples of
the present perfect and past simple.

B Complete the rules with present perfect or past simple.

1 Use the to talk about experiences or things that
happened before now. The time is not specified or important.
2 Use the to talk about recent events, or an action
which started in the past and continues now.

3 Use the to talk about a specific event in the past

sa1nu

a (we know when the event happened).
4 Use the to talk about an action which started and

finished at a specific time in the past.

C Look at the sentences in Exercise 4A again and match them
with one of the rules above.

[> page 130 LANGUAGEBANK

6 A Read the text. What changed Chris Gardner's life?

Chris Gardner is a successful businessman and a millionaire.
But things ! always (not be) easy. He *
(not meet) his father until he was twenty-eight years old. This
experience made him sure about one thing: he was determined
to be a good father to his own children. As a young man,
Gardner ? (experience) hard times. His wife “
(leave) him, he * (lose) his job, and at one stage he and
his two-year-old son ° (sleep) in train stations and
airports. He ’ (come) a long way since then. His life
changed when he ® (meet) a man driving a red Ferrari
and asked him what job he did. The man was a stockbroker, so
Gardner asked him out to lunch, and the Ferrari driver
introduced Gardner to the world of finance. Since he became
successful, he ° (spend) a lot of money helping homeless

people, and he ?° also (write) books about his
experiences. His story was told in the film The Pursuit of
Happyness, starring Will Smith.

B Complete the text with the correct form of the verbs in

brackets.
*”
@ A ()24 weak FORMS: have Listen to the pairs of phrases.
F Notice the difference.
1 | lived / I've lived 3 he decided / he’s decided
2 we met / we've met 4 they spent / they've spent

B 2)2.5 Listen and write the sentences.

C Listen again and check. Then listen and repeat.

8 A Work in pairs. Student A: write Have you ever ... ? questions
using the prompts in the box below. Student B: turn to page 158.

be on TV/in a newspaper watch film at an outdoor cinema
do something embarrassing in public write a poem/story
go to a country ona different continent

collect something asa hobby see someone commit a crime

| i B Take turns to ask and answer questions. Try to find five things
(Jj Josh Brolin H that you have done and your partner hasn’t done.

--- PAGE 21 ---

9A Imagine you are going to make
a film about your life. Choose five
events you would like to include.
Write some notes in the film strip
below.

Early days

A big decision ...

B Work in pairs. Take turns to talk
about the film of your life.

C Think of three questions to ask
your partner about the film of their
life. Ask and answer the questions
Why did you choose to... ?

What happened when you ... ?

What did you enjoy best about ... ?

VOCABULARY // JEU)

PREPOSITIONS

10 PREPOSITION + EXPRESSIONS OF TIME Complete the word webs
with expressions in the box.

Saturday the weekend Monday morning New Year's Day
July the winter/the summer the twenty-first century lunchtime

12 o'clock 1

ee 300
the morning 2010
aac
4 5

night 20

6 the 4th of July
7 8

=
speakout TIP

To help you remember which preposition of time to use, try to memorise
this: on Monday; in winter; at that time.
on = for specific days, in = for time periods, at = for specific times

[> Page 149 VOCABULARYBANK

11 preposition + NOUN Complete the phrases with the correct
preposition: on, for or by.

1 It'sabook Dan Brown, afilm___ Steven Spielberg, a song
_____ Amy Winehouse.

2 Isawit_ TV. |heardit st the radio.| spoke to him
the phone.

3 We went a walk, a drive, arun, a swim.

4 They travelled boat, plane, coach, train.

12 A FixeD EXPRESSIONS Match the fixed expressions in bold in
sentences 1-10 with meanings a)-j).

1 | dropped it by mistake. a) finally

2 | saw the film on my own. b) cannot wait

3 He's here on business. c) bya person, not a machine

4 We met by chance. d) it was not a mistake

5 It was made by hand. e) alone, not with other people

6 We got there in the end. f) not early, not late

7 She said it on purpose. g) in avery short time

8 We arrived on time. h) accidentally

9 I'll do that ina moment. i) not on holiday, but for work
10 They’re in a hurry. j) it was not planned

B Look at Exercise 12A again. Write 6-8 questions with phrases
with prepositions.

Do you usually arrive on time, or are you sometimes late?

Do you prefer to live with someone, or live on your own?

C Work in pairs. Take turns to ask and answer the questions.

--- PAGE 22 ---

CP) weak forms: had, was, were

(v) the news

WHAT REALLY HAPPENED? Qt

mi iG

3 A Read the article again and answer
the questions.

Who died in their bathroom?

1 A Discuss the questions.

1 How do you keep up-to-date with the news?
2 What have been the most important stories in the last five years?

B [b) 2.6 Listen to the excerpts from news reports. Which

Who was shot?
Who was arrested?
Who was murdered?

stories can you see in the photos?

uu BR WN eB

Who were the suspects?
6 Who was photographed?

B How are these words and phrases
= related to the stories?

2 A Workin pairs. Read the definition and look at the photos

shadows fans stars painkillers
below. Then answer the questions.

photographs astudio hospital
the FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation)
|amanwithagun a flag

a conspiracy theory: /kan'sptrasi ‘@1ari/ a theory or belief that there was
a secret plan behind a major event

From Longman Active Study Dictionary.

C Work in pairs. Answer the questions.

1 What do you think? Do you believe
the official reports or the conspiracy
theorists?

2 Do you know any other conspiracy
theories? What happened?

1 What do you think the conspiracy theories were about (the
events in the photos)?

2 Which story do you think involved a real conspiracy, according to
official reports?

Read the article to check your answers.

The World’s best-known conspiracy theories

Man onthe Moon We’veseen the photos, but many people claim that
Neil Armstrong’s ‘giant leap for mankind’ never really happened. They suspect
that the astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin never left earth, but acted
out the scene and took photographs in a studio. Conspiracy theorists say

there were strange shadows falling in the photos, and surprisingly no stars are
visible. They point out that the US flag, planted by Buzz Aldrin, was apparently
waving, although there is no wind on the Moon. However, these doubts can be
explained logically. The lighting conditions on the Moon were complicated, and
the flag only appears to ‘flutter’ because the astronauts moved it.

The King is Dead When Elvis Presley was found lying unconscious on his
bathroom floor at his home Graceland, his family and friends desperately tried
to save him. An ambulance was called and Elvis was rushed to hospital where a
special room had been prepared for him. However, the ‘King of Rock’n’ Roll’ was
already dead when he arrived there. At first, doctors said that Elvis died because
his heart had stopped, but later they claimed that drugs were involved. Elvis had
taken painkillers because he had toothache and he couldn’t sleep. However, for
years his fans refused to believe that Elvis was gone, and there were numerous
sightings of ‘Elvis’ around the world. There is even a website elvis-is-alive.com
dedicated to finding out the truth.

The Death of a President President John F. Kennedy was assassinated on
22nd November 1963. He was riding through crowds in his car when a gunman
shot him once in the head. Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested almost immediately
after Kennedy’s death, and charged with killing him. He was murdered two days
later. Areportin 1964 concluded that Oswald had acted alone. But conspiracy
theorists have doubts, and believe more people were involved. Suspects include
the CIA, the FBI and the Cuban leader Fidel Castro. In 1979, anew report agreed
that Oswald had killed Kennedy, but also concluded that the President was killed
‘as aresult of conspiracy’ by unknown people.

im 23

--- PAGE 23 ---

GRAMMAR VOCABULARY

NARRATIVE TENSES THE NEWS
4 A Read the summary. Find and underline examples of the past 6 A Match the headlines 1-8 with the
simple and the past continuous and answer the questions. explanations a)-h).

7 Actress survives crash
Politicians attacked by

| angry crowd

1 Which tense is used to talk about the main events in a story?
2 Which tense is used to give background information in a story? Student demonstration

turns violent

B Read the conclusion and answer the questions.

FA Workers to strike over pay
B Massive earthquake hits Italy

1 Which of the underlined verbs is in the past simple?
2 Which of the underlined verbs is in the past perfect? i Most wanted fugitive arrested
3 Which tense describes the event(s) that happened first?

ni Floods destroy crops

C Underline the correct alternative to complete the rule.

2 Use the past perfect to talk about actions which happened 8 Hostages released after talks
ha before the past time event we are talking about/a very long with rebels
| time ago.

WEAK FORMS: had, was, were Listen to the news a) Lots of angry people shout and
summary. Notice how was, were and had are pronounced. Listen throw things at some politicians.
again. Try to shadow read the text (read at the same time as the b) People who were kept as prisoners
recording). are allowed to go free.
were preparing /wa/ not /w3:/ c) Police catch a man who they
was riding /waz/ not /woz/ suspect committed a serious crime.
had killed /had/ not /heed/ d) A natural disaster destroys part of

a country.
[> page 130 LANGUAGEBANK e) A woman is involved in a car
: accident but doesn’t die.
5 Read an account of an important news event. Complete the text

f) A lot of farmland is under water.

g) Many people might refuse to go
to work.

h) People who are protesting begin
to fight on the streets.

with phrases a)-h).

a) He had been in prison

b) one of the branches broke

c) we heard some shots

d) 50,000 people were waiting

e) to hear what Mandela was saying
f) When he finally arrived

g) were talking to each other

h) many people had climbed onto it

B Work in pairs. Describe some
stories which have recently been
in the news using the vocabulary
in bold above.

_
11 February 2000: Nelson Mandela’s release from prison speakout TIP
| was in the crowd on the parade in Cape Town that day. It was Headlines can be difficult. They contain
a hot day, and ! to see Mandela walk free from the prison. incomplete sentences: articles and
2 for twenty-seven years. At one point 3 but most auxiliaries can be dropped, simple tenses
people stayed calm. People * and singing songs. There are used instead of continuous or perfect
was a great feeling of solidarity. There was a large tree in the tenses and the infinitive is used to talk
middle of the parade, and ° to get a better view. about the future. Find examples in the
Suddenly, ° and people fell to the ground. But nobody headlines.
wanted to leave. Nobody wanted to miss the chance of seeing
Mandela for the first time. ’ there was a huge cheer. From [> page 149 VOCABULARYBANK
where | was standing, it was difficult ° but | knew | was

there for an important moment in our history.

--- PAGE 24 ---

? A Choose one of the news stories in the lesson or another
important news story. Make notes to answer the questions below.

1 What was the news story? Where were you when you heard the
news?

2 What were you doing? Who were you with?

3 What did you think at first? How did you feel?

4 Did the news change things for you in any way?

B Work with other students. Tell them about your story.

WRITING

A NEWS REPORT; LEARN TO USE TIME LINKERS

8 A Read the news report and answer the questions. Underline the
parts of the news report which help you to answer.
1 Whois the story about? 4 Where did it happen?
2 What happened? 5 When did it happen?
3 Why did it happen? 6 What is the situation now?

Fraud fugitive
in Facebook trap

man who was on the run
Aven police in the US revealed

where he was hiding through
a series of Facebook updates.

Cameroon-born Maxi Sopo falsely

obtained credit from banks while

he was living in the US. By the time

he had finished, he had stolen more

than $200,000. He then escaped ial

to Cancun in Mexico, where he was happily spending the

money, until he made posts on his Facebook page telling

the world that he was ‘living in paradise’.

‘He was making posts about how beautiful life is and how | |

he was having a good time with his buddies,’ said Assistant a

Us Attorney Michael Scoville. ‘He was definitely not living | |

the way we wanted him to be living, given the chargeshe  &

was facing,’ he added.

However, during his time in Cancun, Mr Sopo also

befriended a former justice department official on the

networking site. This man, who had only met Mr Sopo a

few times, was able to discover exactly where Mr Sopo was

living. As soon as he had this information, he passed it to

the Mexican authorities who arrested Sopo last month.

The twenty-six-year-old is currently in custody in

Mexico City.

—————

B Read the news report again. Find examples of the following:

1 quotes used to give someone's opinion

2 aconcluding statement which gives us information about the
current situation

3 an introductory statement which explains in one sentence what
happened

4 more information about the background to the story

9 A Look at the news report and
find examples of the time linkers
in the box.

assoonas while during until
by the time

B Look at the words/phrases in the
box above. Which time linker do we
use to link an action that:

1 happened previously? by the time
2 continues up to that point and then
stops?
until
3 happens at the same time as
another action?
while
4 happens at some point in a period
of time?
during
5 happens immediately after

something else has happened?
as soon as

C Complete the sentences with the
correct time linker.

1 Icame | heard the news.
2 They arrived while we were having
dinner.

3 Her cat died during the night.

4 Wewaited until the lights had
gone out.

5 by the UMFie fire engines arrived, the
house was destroyed.

10 A Workin pairs. Choose a headline
and write six questions asking for
information about the story.

Actress survives crash

Politicians attacked by angry crowd |

Man shot outside his house

B Give your questions to another
pair of students.

C Look at the questions and use
them to write a short news report
(100-150 words). Use the ideas in
Exercise 8B to help you.

D Compare your stories with other
students. Who has the best story?

--- PAGE 25 ---

2.3 )) |DON’T BELIEVE IT!

VOCABULAR

SAY/TELL

1 A Work in pairs and discuss. How do you know
when someone is lying? Do you think their
behaviour changes?

B Read the text to check your answers.

How do you know if someone is lying?

From little white lies to lies which can destroy nations, people
have lied for as long as they have told the truth. Some people
are very good at it. So, how do we know if someone is lying?

Here are the things to look out for

1 The guilty hand: when someone is telling the truth they
usually use more body language. They move their hands and
their face more. When someone lies, their hands are still.

2 The lying eye: people find it very hard to tell you a lie if
they're looking at you straight in the eyes. Normally, they
look away just at the moment that they tell the lie.

3 The ‘Me’: when people tell a story about themselves, they
tend to use a lot of ‘me’ words, like |, me, and my. When
they tell a lie, they don’t use the ‘me’ words as much.

2 A Match 1-6 with a)-f) to make sentences.
1 I'm terrible at telling
2 My brother told me
3 | think you should say
4 Sometimes it’s better to tell
5 You should just say
6 I said

a) ‘hello’, but she didn’t answer.
b) a white lie than to upset someone.
) what you mean.

d) a funny story yesterday.
e) sorry.

f) jokes. | always forget the punch line!

B Add the phrases with say and tell from Exercise

2A to the table.
Say Tell
‘hello’ astory

C Work with other students. Do you agree/disagree

with the statements? Why?

1 Alie can travel half way around the world while
the truth is putting on its shoes.

2 Agood storyteller should mix fiction with truth to
make their stories interesting.

3 It's OK to tell lies sometimes.

 F ) telling a story
(P) intonation: sounding interested

@ say/tell

TELLING A STORY

3 A Lookat the pictures above which tell a story.

They are not in the correct order. What do you think
is happening in each picture?

B [))2.8 Listen to a woman telling her story.
Number the pictures in the correct order.

4 A Look at the phrases we can use to help tell the

sequence ina story. Add the sequencers from the
box to the correct place in the table.

Fhishappenechwhern The next thing | knew

Anyway, Intheend, Before long,
And then, all of a sudden

beginning

In the beginning, ...
This happened when

describing what happened

Well, ...
So, ...

ending

So, ...
Finally, ...

B Listen to the story again, and tick the phrases
you hear. Check your answers in the audio script on
page 165.

[> page 130 LANGUAGEBANK

5 A Workin pairs. Practise telling the story using the

sequencers and the pictures to help you. Start like this:
This happened when the woman had an important
interview and...

B 2)2.9 Do you think the woman was telling a
true or false story? Listen to find out.

--- PAGE 26 ---

SHOW INTEREST

6 A Look at phrases a)-j). Which phrases complete extracts 1-6?
a) what happened then?
b) What did you do?
c) Then what?
d) Oh no!
e) Oh dear.
f) How embarrassing!
g) That's really funny.
h) Really?
i) You're joking!
j) You're kidding!
1 W: So, anyway, erm ... | then got on to the tube, um ... to go for

my interview.
M: Right,and__a
2 W: I’ve woken up shouting the word, ‘Mum!’
M: No!
3 W: At the top of my voice, in a packed, quiet tube.
M:
4 W: ... they're looking at me in a rather strange way.
M: Right ...
5 W: My face had swollen up! ... And it was bright red, ... and

covered in blotches, spots ...
: Oh!
6 W: Yes, and the pills that my mother had given me were so
out-of-date that they had caused an allergic reaction ...
M: Oh!...

=

B (5) 2.10) intonation: sounding interested Listen and check
your answers. Notice how intonation is used to sound interested.
Is it high or low?

C Listen again and repeat the phrases. Try to sound interested.
Then repeat but try to sound bored. Can you hear the difference?

=
speakout TIP

When someone tells a story, try to use comments and questions to
show that you are interested e.g. How amazing! Remember to check
your intonation. Do you sound interested?

7A Prepare to tell a story. It can be

a true story or a lie. Choose one of
the situations below. Talk about
when you:

* got stuck ina lift

* missed (or nearly missed) a flight
* lost something valuable

* spoke to someone famous

* gota tattoo

* went swimming at night

* were mistaken for someone else
* slept outside

* tried a very dangerous sport

* found something unusual

B Think about the details of your
story. Think about the questions
below and make some notes or
practise telling your story. Try to
use some of the sequencers from
Exercise 4.

* Where were you?

* Why were you there?

* What were you doing?

* What happened?

* How did you feel?

C Work with other students. Take
turns to tell your stories and listen
and respond. Ask questions to
decide if it is a true story or a lie.
A: | once got stuck in a lift.

B: Really?

A: Yes. | was ...

D Tell the other students if it is
a true story or a lie.

--- PAGE 27 ---

DVD PREVIEW

1

2

Work in pairs. Discuss the questions.

1 Which famous fictional thieves/
investigators/detectives do you
know about?

2 Which are famous in your country?

3 Do you watch any crime detective
dramas? Which ones? What do you
like/dislike about them?

4 What are the features of good
detective dramas, e.g. interesting
characters?

Look at the pictures and read about
the programme. What problems do
you think Finch had when he stole
the painting?

Hustle a
Hustle is a BBC drama series
about a team of criminals who

try to obtain and sell things in

an illegal or dishonest way. In

this programme we meet Finch,

a burglar. He’s in trouble with
Customs, who believe that he

has stolen a valuable piece of art.
Unfortunately for Finch, when he
stole the painting, things didn’t go
quite according to plan.

DVD VIEW

3 A Watch the programme. What problems did Finch encounter?

B Match the words in the two columns to make common crime
collocations. Work with your partner. What do these words mean?

1 guard < a) thief

2 art \ b) guard
3 valuable \ c) weapon
4 burglar \ d) officer
5 customs > e) dog

6 loaded f) alarm
7 security g) painting

C Tick the things above which you see in the clip. Which of the
above do you not see?

4 A Workin pairs and answer the questions.

1 How does Finch get into the grounds of the mansion?

2 What is the security guard doing?

3 What does Finch do when he breaks into the house?

4 Why does Finch have to run with the artwork?

5 How does Finch escape?

6 What happens at the airport?

7 Why do customs officers search Finch? Do they find anything?
8 What do customs plan to do?

B Watch the DVD again to check.

C Discuss what you think Finch does next. What do you think
will happen?

--- PAGE 28 ---

out anarrative

Work in groups. Look at the pictures. What do
you think happened?

)\\ilu0

(>) 2.11 Listen to someone telling the story.
Do you think the story is true?

Listen again and tick the key phrases you hear.

PHRASES
This story is about ...
The problem was that ...
In fact, ...
What he didn’t realise/know was that ...
However, ...
Later ...
Because of this, ...
In the end, ...

Work in pairs. Take turns to retell the story using
the key phrases.

Work in pairs. Student A: look at the picture story
on page 159. Student B: look at the picture story
on page 160. Use the phrases in Exercise 5C to tell
your partner what happens in your story.

back anewspaper article

Read about a famous art theft. Who stole the

painting? Why did he steal it? What happened
in the end?

Famous painting stolen

On 21st August, 1911, Leonardo da
Vinci’s Mona Lisa, one of the most
famous paintings in the world, was
stolen from the wall of the Louvre
Museum, in Paris. At first, the police
thought one of the guards might have
stolen the painting, but seventeen
days after the theft, they arrested poet
Guillaume Apollinaire. However, he
was released when police could find
no evidence that he had committed
the crime. Two years later, the real
thief, Vincenzo Peruggia, was arrested
in Italy. Peruggia had worked at the
museum, and had stolen the painting
because he was angry about how many
Italian paintings were on display in
France. He had planned to return the
painting to the Italian Uffizi gallery, in
Florence. The public was so excited at
the news of finding the Mona Lisa that
the painting was displayed throughout
Italy before it was returned to France
in 1913.

Write up the story of Finch’s art theft as

a newspaper article, using the article above
and the key phrases to help you.

--- PAGE 29 ---

2.5 (( LOOKBACK

© TYPES OF STORY il

1 A Add the missing letters to complete the types of story.
1 One of my favouritea_ films of all time is The Terminator.
2 Jamie Foxx starsinRay,agreatb of Ray Charles.

3 Pretty Woman, starring Julia Roberts and Richard Gere, is my

favouriter, € __

4 I'mnotagreatfanofp do, , but | thought this
production of Jane Eyre was brilliant.

5 llovedthep = -teo _, Silence of the Lambs,
but | found it very scary.

6 | still enjoy Agatha Christie's Murder on the Orient Express. It’s one
ofthebesteverd films.

7 Ican’twatchs foo films, like Star Wars and
Alien. | can’t stand them.

8 Ithinkd _, films like Nixon, are a great way to

learn about what really happened during important events.

B Choose your three favourite film genres. Find other students
who like the same genres and work together to make ‘best ever’
lists of the films in those genres.

© PRESENT PERFECT AND PAST SIMP

2 A Lookat the phrases below. Have you done any of these things?
Write sentences using I’ve ..., | haven't ... and | have never ... .
* see a famous band * organise a big family party
* ride a horse + play in a band/write a song
* visit another country + walk in the mountains/go skiing
* runa marathon swim with dolphins/go scuba diving
* start a business meet someone famous
* travel on your own go to university/change your job
* write a diary/blog

B Choose one thing you have/haven’t done and tell your partner
more about it.

I've played in a band. When | was at university | played in a band called
‘The Hooligans’.

© NARRATIVE TENSES

3 A Put the verbs in the correct tense to complete the story.

Sasha !_ woke (wake) up late because she *_had forgotten
(forget) to set her alarm clock. She >_ Was having (have) breakfast
when the telephone’ "ang (ring). It was her boss. He
wanted to know why she ® didn't finish (not finish) the report that
he & had asked (ask) her to do. She quickly ’__left

(leave) the house to go to work. She °_was satnding (stand) on the
train when she noticed that lots of people ° were looking (look) at
her feet. Then, she °_ realised (realise) that she 1! had forgotten
(forget) to put her shoes on. She !@_ was wearing (wear) her
slippers.

B Can you remember a day when you woke up late? Why?
What happened? Tell your partner.

© THE NEWS

4 A Underline the correct option to

complete the headlines.

1 Postal destroy/strike causes huge
delays

2 Police attacked during student
demonstration/crash

3 Fugitives/Hostages released after
negotiation with rebel leader

4 Hundreds homeless after
earthquake/violent hits

5 Fugitive/Flood found hiding in forest

6 Train strike/crash kills sixty people

7 House attacked/crashed with petrol
bomb

B Work in pairs. Choose two or three
of the headlines in Exercise 3A. Write
mini news stories giving more details
about each story.

@ TELLING A STORY

5 A Adda word to each speaker's part
to correct the conversations.

happened
1 A: This(when | was living in Hong
Kong.
B: Oh really? happened? of

2 A: | was having a shower when all a
sudden | saw a huge spider.
B: Oh no. What you do?
3 A: Anyway, before | knew it
someone called the police.
B: Really What next?
4 A: The next | knew, the man was
| running towards me and shouting.
B: don't believe it!
5 ee | was going up the
Sski-lift and | fell off.
B: embarrassing!
6 A: So, in end, | had to pay all the
onnaney back.
B: dear.

B Work in pairs. Choose three of the
conversations above and expand the
stories.

C Work in groups. Take turns to
role-play your conversations.

--- PAGE 30 ---

SPEAKING

LISTENING

READING
WRITING

3.1 Discuss your plans and arrangements 3.2 Talk about predictions
3.3 Explain misunderstandings 3.4 Discuss how to create a video channel

3.1 Listen to people discussing making plans 3.3 Listen to a series of
misunderstandings 3.4 Watch a BBC documentary about the rise of YouTube

3.2 Read an article about the future

3.1 Write a series of messages 3.4 Write a proposal

BIBIC

INTERVIEWS

©) Can new technology
help communication?
oN

¥ 7

--- PAGE 31 ---

3.1 MAKING PLANS © the future (plans)

fast speech: going to
(Vv) organisation

VOCABULARY

ORGANISATION

1A Workin pairs. Read the introduction to the questionnaire.
Are you a planner or a procrastinator?

B In pairs ask and answer questions 1-4 in the questionnaire.
Do you have similar answers?

C Find phrases in bold to match the definitions below.

1 not pay attention to the things you are supposed to be doing
delay (a job)

spend time doing things that aren’t important

put jobs in order of which is most important

do lots of different jobs at the same time

complete tasks

do jobs just before the time they need to be done

do things in advance

be careful with your time

begin a job Are you a
D Work in groups. Answer the questions.

1 When was the last time you left something until the last minute? olan N er

2 Can you think of a job that you have put off for a while? When do
you plan to do it?

3 What do you get distracted by when you’re working? How do you
try to avoid distractions?

4 Do you think it’s a good idea to write to-do lists?

[> page 150 VOCABULARYBANK Do you plan your day or do you prefer to
see what happens? A planner will spend the
night before work making lists, prioritising,

LISTENING and making sure everything is under control.

They arrive early and get started on their
2 ()) 3.1 Listen to three people discussing the questionnaire. first task. A procrastinator, on the other
Which of the following topics do they not talk about?

OANA U RWDN

ay
o

hand, is more likely to arrive at work just
making plans holidays writing lists work in time, with a coffee and breakfast in their
arrangements for tonight hand and a stressed look on their face.

3 A Workin pairs. Can you complete these sentences from the

7 . When you have a job to do, or you need
listening?

to meet a deadline, do you:
1 You generally like to do things ahead of

2 It's the only way to get done. 1 generally do things ahead of time or
3 You might need to change your , so why bother making leave things until the last minute?

plans in the first place? y) prefer to get started on a difficult job or
4 | much prefer to and see what happens. put off doing difficult jobs until later?
5 This evsnininnga _ of mine's Pan ER 3 tend to get distracted easily and waste
6 I'm going totryoutanew___ recipe. time or do you use your time wisely
7 I'llsee how | . | might go out, or | might just stay at home and get things done?

and

, write to-do lists and prioritise tasks or

8 | do get jobs done, but | never get started away. 4 do you prefer to multitask?

B Listen again to check your answers.

C Discuss. Who would you prefer to work with, Laurie, Kenna
or Javier? Why?

--- PAGE 32 ---

GRAMMAR

THE FUTURE (PLANS)

4 Read the conversation and find examples of the
structures described below.

Kenna: This evening a friend of mine’s coming
over. We're eating at my house - I’m going
to try out a new pasta recipe. And then
we're going to the cinema to see that new
Argentinian film.

Laurie: Javier?

Javier: Uhhh ... | don’t really know. I'll see how |
feel. | might go out, or | might just stay at
home and relax. | told you, | really don’t like
to plan.

1 Use present continuous to talk about plans
or arrangements which have already been
made, e.g. A friend of mine is coming over.

2 Use going to + infinitive without to to talk
about a plan or intention. You have decided
that you want to do this, but you may not
have made the arrangements,

eg.

3 Use might + infinitive without to when you
are undecided or not sure what the plan is,
eg.

4 Use will + infinitive without to, to talk about
the future when you have no specific plan,
or you make the decision at the time of
speaking, e.g.

sand

[> page 132 LANGUAGEBANK

5A ()) 3.2 Listen and complete the sentences.

1 What at the weekend?

2 We my brother and his family.
3 Where for them?

4 They a party on Friday.

5 with us tomorrow?

6 |'llask Marion when she

B FAST SPEECH: going to Listen again. Notice how
the speakers sometimes pronounce going to /gana/
in fast speech. Tick the sentences where going to is
pronounced /gana/.

C Listen again and practise saying the

sentences fast.

What are you going to do at the weekend?

6 Underline the correct alternatives to complete
the conversation.

Pete: Hey Dax. What 'are you two doing/will you
two do on Saturday night?

Dax: | don’t know. We ’might/will go to the Death
City Dread concert. What about you?

Pete: °/'ll have/I'm going to have a bit of a party.
My parents ‘are going/will go away for the
weekend, so I've asked a few people to come
over to my place. Kris ®will bring/is bringing
his DJ equipment round, so °we’re having/
we'll have music. And everyone ‘is going to
bring/might bring some food and drink.
Euan ‘will come/is coming with a few friends.
Do you think you can make it?

Dax: It sounds great. °l’m going to text/I'll text Leyla
to ask her what she thinks. Then '°/’m calling/
I'l call you back to let you know. Is that OK?

Pete: That's fine. "/’ll speak/I'm going to speak to
you later. Bye.

2? A Write sentences for situations 1-6 below.
Think about whether you have made arrangements
already, then decide which tenses to use.

1 something you plan to do at the weekend

Some friends are coming to stay. (I've already

arranged this.)

| might go out for a pizza on Friday night. (I don’t

know yet.)

2 something you are going to do after the class

3 something you might buy in the near future

4 something that someone in your family is
planning to do

5 aplan or ambition you have, related to your
work/studies

6 something that you plan to do for your next
holiday

B Work in pairs. Compare your ideas. Ask and
answer questions to find out more information.

A: My sister’s moving to Poland.
B: Really? That sounds exciting. Which city?

(UGH. Seal

i.

--- PAGE 33 ---

—_
PSPEAKING speal@ut TIP

Leave it out! When we write notes

8 A Think about two or three plans or arrangements with other and messages we don’t always write
people that you have made recently. Use the questions below to complete sentences. We often miss out
make some notes. small grammatical words to make the
1 What is the plan? message shorter.

2 Who is involved?

3 How did you communicate to make the arrangements? 10 A Lookat messages 1-4 in Exercise
B Work in groups. Tell the other students about your plans and 9. The words in the box have been
how you made the arrangements. Do you have similar or different left out. Which message do they
ways of organising yourselves? belong to?

| We'll Your I’ve Canyou I'll

WRITING B Rewrite messages 1-4 below using

MESSAGES; LEARN TO USE NOTE FORM fewer words.

9 Work in pairs. Look at messages 1-4 and answer the questions. rt | '
feeling hungry?
1 What do you think the relationship is between the writer and the D want to meet me
person they’re writing to? for lunch at Pavarotti’s
2 Are the messages formal or informal? perm staf

2 | eZ

We're going to see
Pete Elton John in concert.
Please call Theta ers | ook you a ticket?
onya

07679 437 562 asap
Lucy

called to say that
he won't be able to
come to dinner.
think Id call him
eRe <a back on 01954 627 823?
: - - Thanks. Jayne

Hope you enjoyed
{Ne concert.
Dinner’ s in the oven. i

| Fe

fj : j (can't come to the
cinema tonight because
I've got too much work
to do. | hope you enjoy
the film.

Bess

11. write short messages for the
situations below.

1 You're going away for the weekend
and would like your flatmate to
water the plants.

2 You want to invite a classmate to
the cinema.

3 You need to apologise to a work
colleague for missing a meeting.

--- PAGE 34 ---

TOMORROW’S WORLD

L Look at the photos and answer the

questions.

1 What inventions or developments
do the pictures show?

2 How do you think they can benefit
people?

2 A Read the article. What does it tell

us about the things shown in Exercise
1? What predictions does it make
about translating machines and

nano monitors?

B Complete the summary of the
article with words from the text.
Use one word in each gap.

The writer believes a machine will

be able to! our words into
different languages. She thinks we'll
use monitors in our ¢ to check
our health, and 3D printers will make
perfect ? of human organs like
the heart. We will entertain ourselves
with virtual reality, as computers
learn to interact with the ¢ . The
problems caused by ° change
will mean vertical farming becomes
popular.

C Discuss with other students.

1 Which ideas in the article do you
like? Can you think of other uses for
these inventions?

2 Which ideas don’t you like? Why
not?

3 Which ideas do you agree will
probably come true?

the future (predictions)
@ stress in time markers

( 3.2

future time markers; idioms

Communication

a 3D printer

Entertainment

n the near future, we may be
able to communicate in any
anguage we choose. A number
of companies are working on
ranslating machines that use the
voice frequencies of the speaker.
This makes it sound as though
the user is speaking the foreign
anguage. We already have
translating machines, but they
are slow and inaccurate and they
sound like robots. In only a year or
two this new machine, which will
lm. a headset, could come onto the

arket and allow us to speak every
language under the sun.

Health

The future of health is going to be
a tale of big and small. Tiny nano
monitors will be placed inside our
bodies, and these will produce

ig Data - enormous amounts of

[if restion ~ that allow us to check

our health and help us predict
illnesses. Another big development
probably won't be ready in the short
term, but in the long term there
is hope that 3D printers will make
copies of body parts such as hearts,
livers and kidneys. If it happens,

is is likely to save millions of lives.
Using 3D printers, we can already
make copies of plastic and metal
objects. The next step is to copy

Cie tissue.

IL immersion virtual reality will
with us in perhaps ten to twenty
years’ time. We will be able to
plant tiny microchips in the brain,
allowing a person to experience
games, movies, and virtual life
as if they are real. As computers
interact with the brain, we will
have the sensation of touching,
seeing, hearing, and smelling virtual
objects in virtual worlds. Instead
of just watching heroes in movies,
signals to the brain will let us feel
what our heroes feel, see what they
see. Fortunately, if things get too
terrifying, we will be able to switch
it off with the push of a button!

Global problems

In the next thirty years, climate
change is going to seriously affect
ditional farming. Floods and
ughts will disrupt farming

itterns that have existed for
thousands of years. Because of this,
cities will have to start producing
food, and vertical farming will
become common. Tower blocks
and skyscrapers will have gardens
built into them. Each floor will
grow different plants, fruits and
vegetables, and the water will be

rmland will now rise hundreds of
meters into the air.

cycled. Instead of stretching out
i miles across the landscape,

--- PAGE 35 ---

VOCABULARY

FUTURE TIME MARKERS

3 A Read sentences 1-6 from the article in Exercise 2A and
underline the time markers.

1

N

w

wi

a

In the near future, we may be able to communicate in any
language we choose.

In only a year or two the machine, which will be a headset,
could come onto the market ...

Another big development probably won't be ready in the
short term,

... inthe long term there is hope that 3D printers will make
copies of body parts ...

Full immersion virtual reality will be with us in perhaps ten to
twenty years’ time.

In the next thirty years, climate change is going to seriously
affect traditional farming.

B Look at the time markers again. Which of them mean soon?
Which mean ina long time? Which name a future date or time
period? Group them.

C ())3.3 sTRESS INTIME MARKERS Listen to the underlined

expressions in 3A. Which words in these expressions are stressed?

Which words are the most important to the meaning of each
expression?

D Work in pairs. Ask and answer the questions using both the
time markers given.

1

2

3 Will your working life/life as a student change: a) in the next five

Will you still live in the same place: a) in the near future?
b) in ten years’ time?

What projects will you work on: a) in the short term?

b) in the long term?

to ten years? b) in a year or two?

GRAMMAR !

THE FUTURE (PREDICTIONS)

4 A Read the extracts from the article. Are the predictions certain

(C) or possible (P)?

1 We may be able to communicate in any language we choose. P
2 Inonlya year or two, the headset could come onto the market.

3

4 Climate change is going to seriously affect traditional farming.

5

B Look at the underlined words above. Complete the rules with

This is likely to save millions of lives.

Tower blocks and skyscrapers will have gardens.

will, could, to or be.

sa1nu

1 We use _ will
about the future.
2 We use going to + infinitive without to to make
predictions when there is present evidence.

3 We use may or + infinitive without to to say
something is possible but not certain.
4 We use likely + infinitive with
probably happen.

+ infinitive without to to make predictions

to say something will

[> page 132 LANGUAGEBANK

5 A Circle the correct alternative to
complete the text.

Dr Michio Kaku is a physicist
who makes TV programmes
about the future. He believes
we 'will be design/will design
new worlds that look like our
own, and that virtual reality
is -become/going to become
more like our reality. In one programme,
Kaku jumps into a remote controlled car,
and tells us the car is so intelligent that
the words ‘traffic jam’ and ‘traffic accident’
3are going to diappear/going to disappear
from the language. He also says that in

a few years’ time microchips will be so
cheap they ‘are could be built/could be
built into every product we buy - our walls,
our furniture, even our clothes. And they
5likely/are likely to be so small we won't
know/won't to know they exist. Kaku also
believes our sunglasses ‘may become/may
becoming our future home entertainment
centre. He then does a virtual dance

using 3-D technology (his dance partner

is hundreds of miles away) and explains
that one day in the near future, 3-D
technology ‘is could replace/could replace
the telephone and °reduce might/might
reduce air travel. Finally, he investigates
robots and concludes that, in the long
term, some of our closest friends might
not be/might be not people.

B Discuss. Which predictions, if they
come true, will be good/bad for the
world? Why?

6 A Look at the pictures about the world
in 2040. What information did you
already know? Is there anything you
find surprising or unlikely?

B Imagine you are a ‘futurist’ and it’s
your job to predict the future. Think
about the topics in the box. What
changes do you think will happen in
these areas by 2040? Make some notes.

communication technology food
work habits cities the environment

C Work in pairs and discuss your ideas.

Communication: | think we will probably
have video conference calls with people’s
holograms. There probably won't be ...

--- PAGE 36 ---

THE WORLD IN 2040

ENERGY

TRANSPORT AND TRAVEL

VOCABULARY S

IDIOMS

2 A Read comments 1-4. Which of the topics in the images are

they referring to?

1 ‘I like that statistic. | teach reading, so it’s an issue that’s close to
my heart!

2 ‘If that statistic is correct, then coastal countries like mine are
running out of time!’

3 ‘This hits the nail on the head: we will eradicate old illnesses, but
new ones will develop.

4 ‘Let's face it: the world will be completely overcrowded’

B Read the definition of an idiom and underline the idioms in
sentences 1-4.

idiom /1d1am/ [C] a group of words that have a special meaning when they
are used together: ‘On top of the world is an idiom meaning ‘very happy

From Longman Active Study Dictionary.

C Look at the underlined idioms in Exercise 7A and decide if

these statements about idioms are true (T) or false (F)?

1 Idioms are usually formal.

2 You cannot usually change the order of words in an idiom.

3 You can sometimes change the verb tense and the subject of an
idiom.

4 You can usually guess the meaning from one word in the idiom.

D Work in pairs and compare your answers. Then turn to page
159 to check your answers.

=>
speakout TIP

Write new idioms in a special place in your

vocabulary notebook. Record them in
context and add your own examples. Do
this for the idioms in Exercises 7 and 8A.
Then try them out. Make sure it’s the right
situation and you use the exact words.

8 Work in pairs. Look at the idioms
organised by topic. What do the
underlined idioms mean?

Problems

1 We forgot to pay our taxes. Now
we're in hot water.

2 | said the wrong thing again.
| always put my foot in it.

Time

3 We're working against the clock. We
have two hours to finish the project.

4 |'m sure we can win this match but
we're running out of time.

9 Look at the idioms organised by
key words. Match idioms 1-6 with
meanings a)-f).

Body parts

1 Keep an eye on him. b

2 Can you give me a hand?

Food and drink

3 It’s not my cup of tea.

4 It was a piece of cake.

Animals

5 You're a dark horse!

6 | want to get out of the rat race.

a) | don’t like it

b) watch

c) help me

d) the competitive world of work
e) you have a lot of secrets

f) easy

10 A Find and correct the mistakes.

There is a mistake in each sentence.

1 When was the last time you gave
someone the hand?

2 Which student do you think is a
horse dark?

3 When’s the last time you put your
feet in it?

4 Which issues are close by your heart?

5 Do you often have to work against
the clocks?

6 When were you last in warm water?

B write an answer to each question.
Then compare your answers.

[> page 150 VOCABULARYBANK

--- PAGE 37 ---

3.3 IN OTH ER WORDS _ @ dealing with misunderstandings

(P) linking in connected speech
iv) misunderstandings

=|
que
ae =

VOCABULAR |

MISUNDERSTANDINGS

CTION

DEALING WITH MISUNDERSTANDINGS

L Look at the photos. What is the situation in each one? 3A b) Listen to four telephone conversations

2 A Read sentences 1-8 and complete them
with phrases a)-h). Which are about future
arrangements?

1 When we meet later, make sure you go to the

Judd Road in the town centre because ...

We mistakenly left home at 5.30 because ...

| was expecting to see Pete, my old school

friend, but ...

4 | didn’t do the homework because ...

wn

5 | organised a party for tomorrow night!
| thought her birthday was 6th May but ...
6 | ended up at the wrong house because ...
7 | called Deb to invite her over, but she thought

| was a stranger because ...
8 | answered the phone, but ...

a) it was a wrong number.

b) I'd got the wrong address.

c) we got the date wrong.

d) we thought it started at 6.

e) it was a different Peter Smith.

f) there are two streets with the same name.
g) she didn’t recognise my voice.

h) | didn’t realise it was for today.

B Which expressions in bold show
misunderstandings about: a) people b) places c)
times d) someone on the phone?

C Can you remember a misunderstanding in
your life about a time, person, place, etc? What
happened? Tell other students.

involving misunderstandings. What was the
misunderstanding in each conversation?

B Listen again and answer the questions.
Conversation 1

1 Who did the woman want to speak to?
2 Who did she speak to?

Conversation 2
3 How did David make his hotel reservation?
4 What hotel does he want to stay in?

Conversation 3

5 What time does the show finish?

6 What time did the show start?
Conversation 4

7 What does the woman want to rent?
8 What is the date?

C Complete expressions 1-7 with the words in
the box.

tell that me(x2) saying mean name again

1 | didn’t catch any of :

2 You've lost

3 Could you repeat the last ?

4 Can you say that ?

5 What exactly do you ?

6 | don’t get what you're

7 Do you mean to wa?

3.5 Listen and check. Then listen again and
copy the intonation.

[> page 132. LANGUAGEBANK

--- PAGE 38 ---

4 A Put the underlined words in the correct order to
complete B’s responses. Use capital letters where
necessary.

1 A: Ohno! | can't find the key.
B: do say mean to you we're going to be locked
out all night?
Do you mean to say
2 A: And after Jimmy left Minnie, he married Millie,
who used to be married to Billy.
B: lost me you've. Who are all these people?
3 A: There was a little accident with the spaghetti
bolognese and your sofa.
B: mean exactly what you do?
4 A: The boss wants to see you. It’s about the money
that’s missing from the accounts.
B: what don’t saying get you're I.
5 A: Um, er, | think my new phone number is, um,
654 0987 6743.
B: catch | that any of didn’t. What's the number?
6 A: My home address is 39 Kings Street,
Manchester, Lancashire, M8 2TO.
B: that you say again can? | didn’t hear.
7 A: We're leaving Los Angeles at 11p.m. OK? Then
we arrive in Sydney at 5.50a.m.
B: part you the repeat could last? | didn’t hear you.

B Work in pairs. What does speaker A say next?
Continue the conversations with your own words.

LEARN TO

REFORMULATE

5 A Read the extracts from audio 3.4. Underline five
examples of how the speaker reformulates what
he/she heard.

1 A: We've got no reservations in the name of
Cullinan, and we're fully booked tonight.
B: So you're saying | can’t stay here. This is the
Sheldon Hotel, yes?

2 C: Didn't you say it starts at seven?

D: No, it starts at five and finishes at seven!

C: So what you mean is I’ve missed the whole show.
3 E: Yes, but today’s a holiday and all the cars have

been booked already.

F: Do you mean to tell me that there’s nothing at
all? No cars available?

E: There's nothing till tomorrow, I’m afraid.

F: But | definitely booked a car for today, the third
of July.

E: It’s the fourth of July today. In other words, your
booking was for yesterday.

B b)36) LINKING IN CONNECTED SPEECH Listen
to the phrases. Notice how the words are linked
together in fast speech.

So_you're saying ...
C Listen again and repeat the phrases.

6 A Workin pairs and role-play the situation.

Student A

You are a guest at a hotel. Twenty
minutes ago you called reception,
asking for some soap to be sent to
your room. Room service brought
you some tomato soup. You want
them to take the soup back and

bring some soap. Call reception to
make your complaint.

Student B

You are a receptionist at a hotel.
A guest calls to make a complaint.
Start the conversation by saying
‘Reception. How can | help you?’

Hello. Yes, I'm afraid | have a problem
... Explain the problem.

Apologise for the misunderstanding
and say you will send someone
with soap.

Check details and thank the
receptionist for their help.

Confirm details, apologise again
and end the call.

B Change roles and turn to page 159.

C Work in pairs and take turns. Student A: ring
reception and make a complaint. Student B:
apologise and offer a solution. Use the flow charts
to help and role-play the situations.

--- PAGE 39 ---

)) YOUTUBE: THE FUTURE OF TV?

Read six opinions about YouTube. Watch the DVD. What is YouTube doing to improve its online
What do the words in bold mean? content?
1 | love YouTube because the creators
of the videos are often normal
people like us, the consumers.
2 The thing | hate about YouTube is
he adverts, especially when you
can’t skip them.
3 The audience for some YouTube
videos may be bigger than for some

Watch the DVD again and complete the fact file.

VALUE: $1,000,000,000
FOUNDED: in ? ;
CREATORS: for some, YouTube is a full-time job

MAKING MONEY: YouTube invites popular creators to put 2
on their videos.

TY propramntés STUDIO: creators with 50,000?____—_—scan use the studio.

4 in of the conifer on YouTube is BIGGEST STUDIOS Pesphoals
I
errible. The filmin eet esiare CRITICISM OF ¢ think content should be free.
a 8 4 BUSINESS MODEL:

ow quality.
5 | don’t go on YouTube that much oo .

and I'd never subscribe to a Work in pairs. Answer the questions.

YouTube channel. 1 Who has ‘some of the biggest audiences in Britain’?
6 Making good quality YouTube 2 Who makes more money: YouTube video creators or TV

videos requires a big investment of programme makers?

time and money. 3 What kind of techniques do creators learn in the YouTube

Work in pairs and discuss studios?
statements 1-6 above. Which ones do 4 What will ‘a better quality of content’ bring for YouTube? aes
you agree with? 5 What does Andrew Keen say about the internet and ‘the creative

community’?
Read the programme information.
What is it about? Who does the
presenter speak to?

Watch the DVD again to check your answers.

Discuss in groups.

- 1 Do you think the DVD clip is positive or negative about YouTube,
or is it balanced?
The Culture i 2 What do you think of the type of short clips (‘kids messing
around in their bedrooms’) in the programme?
Show YouTu be: 3 Do you think that YouTube is ‘the future of TV’? Do you think
The Futu re of TV? it will become more popular than mainstream TV or is it only

aimed at young people?
This BBC documentary looks

at the rise of YouTube and finds
out what the company is doing
to improve its online content.
Jacques Peretti goes into the
YouTube office and talks to
some of the young creators
who are changing the
entertainment industry.

--- PAGE 40 ---

out create a video channel back a proposal
You are going to create your own video channel. A new company is looking for funding to make
Think about the points below. Is there any other videos. Read the company’s proposal. Do you think
important information you should consider? it will get funding? Why?/Why not?
* name of channel
* type of video clips FUTURE SHOCK VIDEOS
* target audience We are looking for funding to make exciting and
* what's special about the channel innovative videos about a topic that is close to everyone’s

. : : : heart: the environment. In the long term there will be big
man mall ett n clea changes to the natural world including floods and major

* competitors/rivals earthquakes. As a group of environmental scientists,

* how frequently you will upload new videos we intend to predict the effects of these changes and,
D317! Listen tot le planni ultimately, to help prevent them.

7 ISTEN LO EWO People Pranhine, 2: NEW We will combine straight reporting, docudrama and
YouTube channel. What do they say about each of science fiction. The videos will be presented by some of
the points in Exercise 6A? the nation’s leading scientists and thinkers, as well as
actors. We will upload new videos once a month.

Our target audience is anyone interested in how the
world will look in the next 30-100 years. It could be other
PHRASES scientists, students or anyone from the general public.

The first thing [I think] is ... We thank you for your attention and look forward to
: hearing from you soon.

Listen again and tick the key phrases you hear.

We came up with this idea.

It would be really [cool/interesting/fun] to ... James Toffler
What's the angle? Please see the attachment for funding scales and further
So the target audience is ... details of our financial plan.
Who will be the presenters?
Who are our competitors or rivals? Use the sentence openers below to write a

y How often will we upload new videos? proposal for your idea from Exercise 7A. Invent any
What about a name? additional details you want to.

We are looking for ...

We intend to ...

The videos will be presented by ...
We will upload new videos ...

Our target audience is ...

We thank you for ...

Work in groups. Think of an idea for the task in
Exercise 6A. Make sure you discuss all the points
and take notes.

Work with another group and take turns to
present your ideas. What are the advantages and
disadvantages of each idea? Work with a different group from the one you

worked with in Exercise 7B and exchange proposals.
Do you think the other group’s proposal is worth
funding? Why?/Why not?

--- PAGE 41 ---

3.5 (( LOOKBACK

© ORGANISATION il

1A Complete the sentences with words from the box.

wisely ahead minute time prioritise multitask off
distracted done started deadline

1 It's late. | really think we should get

2 Why do you always have to leave things until the last ?
3 Sorry, | got by the football on the television.

4 You've got so many things to do. You'll have to
with the most important.

| worked hard and got a lot of things

I'm afraid they're just wasting your

I'd like to get this done of time, so we can go on holiday.
| keep putting writing my essay.

and start

this morning.

OANA YW

for this work.
10 We won't be here for long, so use your time
| think it’s better not to but to focus on doing one job at
atime.

ry
ry

B Work in pairs. Choose two or three of the phrases from
Exercise 1A and use them to make short dialogues.

A: We need to get a lot of things done, but we don’t have much time.
B: Right. We'd better get started.

© THE FUTURE (PLANS

2A Complete the paragraphs with phrases from the box.

I'm going to have to stay up all night or I'll never meet the

‘m going tohave having ‘morganising might ‘m finishing
are going I'llbe arecoming will going to

i work at the end of the month. I’ve been a teacher here
for nearly twenty years, so *

the last time. But in the future, I° more time to do some of
the things I enjoy. My wife and I 4 travelling. We *

visit Australia, which I’ve always wanted to do.

sad when I leave the school for

that I don’t see very often, so I’m really looking
a band, and lots of delicious food and
have a good time.

people ®
forward to it. 1°
drink, so everyone '°

Tim be forty next month, so I’m 7 a big party. Lots of

B Write a short paragraph describing a plan you have for the
future. Then compare your ideas with a partner.

© FUTURE TIME MARKERS

3 A Choose the correct ending in each case, a) b) orc).

1 | might live in a foreign country in the long a) time b) term c) days.

2 | hope to be retired in twenty years’ a) future b) ahead c) time.

3 I will finish this course in a month a) or two b) coming c) time.

4 | hope to write my autobiography a long time a) ago b)_ ahead
c) from now.

5 | want to buy a new car in the near a) time b) future c) term.

6 I'm going to go travelling next a) year b) years c) future.

B Choose four of the sentences above. Change the words in
italics so they are true for you.

HE FUTURE
(PREDICTIONS)
4 A Find and correct the grammatical
mistakes. One sentence is correct.

1 Man not will fly for fifty years.
(1901)

2 There isn’t going be any German
reunification this century. (1984)

3 Democracy will to be dead by 1950.
(1936)

4 By 1980 all power (electric, atomic,
solar) is likely be almost free. (1956)

5 The Japanese car industry isn’t likely
to be successful in the US market.
(1968)

6 Man will be never reach the Moon.
(1957)

7 Television won't very matter in your
lifetime or mine. (1936)

8 The internet may to become useful
for business but never for the
general public. (1989)

B Change the verbs so they mean
the opposite and become intelligent
predictions. You may need to change
some other words.

Man will fly within fifty years

@ DEALING WITH
MISUNDERSTANDIN(
5A Complete B’s responses using the
words in the box.

lost mean to say saying
don’t do

1 A: I've heard that a lot of our
employees like you.

Bale get what you're *

A: And I’m looking for someone to
take over the business when |
retire.

B: What exactly * you
4 ?

2 A: David Johnson and Johnny
Thomson are going to meet
Tommy Davies tonight.

B: You've ° me.

A: Johnson, Thomson and Davies
are the company directors.
They're meeting to discuss the
company’s future.

B: Do you mean © u
they’re meeting without me?

B Work in pairs. Write a dialogue
that uses three of the phrases in
Exercise 5A. Act out your dialogues.

--- PAGE 42 ---

p50

SPEAKING 4.1 Discuss how important becoming a millionaire is for you 4.2 Talk about B | |B |
past habits 4.3 Participate ina meeting 4.4 Describe a day in your life

LISTENING 4.2 Listen to people describing dream jobs gone wrong 4.3 Listen to people INTERVIEWS

making decisions ina meeting 4.4 Watch a BBC comedy about a man’s first @)) Is your job a ‘dream job’?
day in anew job

READING 4.1 Read an article about millionaires 4.2 Read a covering letter Ko yn
¥ 7

7

WRITING — 4.2 Write a covering letter 4.4 Write about your daily routine

--- PAGE 43 ---

4.1 }) MILLIONAIRES Q resinous

CP) fast speech: have to
(Vv) personal qualities; confusing words

VOCABULAR d)

PERSONAL QUALITIES

1 A Read about the qualities people need to do their jobs. Which
jobs do you think they are talking about?
14 4 Winning is the most important thing for me. I've always
been competitive, so I love my job. I think I’m a good leader. It's
important that all the players know what they’re doing and it's my
job to tell them. The decisions I make are important for the whole
team, so I can't be indecisive. )

4 4 I have classes of 80 to 100 children so I have to be hard-working.
Ido my best, because education is so important for the children.
You need to be a good communicator in my job, so that you can
get the children interested in what they have to learn. Often, we
don't have very many resources, so we also need to be creative and
be able to think outside the box. 9 9

“ Gi'marisk taker, so starting my own business wasn't difficult
for me. I’ve always been very motivated and ambitious. | start
work at 4.30a.m. every day. I don't enjoy sleep. You can't afford to
be lazy if you want to make money. © ©

B Match the words and phrases in bold above with the
definitions 1-9.

1 work with a lot of effort hard-working

have problems making a decision indecisive

think differently or in a new way think outside the box
want to be more successful than others competitive
want to be successful or powerful ambitious

want to achieve somethng because it's interesting or exciting Motivated
person who does things which are dangerous a risk taker

person who has the qualities to manage a group of people® 9004 leade

9 person who can express ideas or feelings clearly to others
a good communicator’
C Which qualities do you think you have? Work in pairs and

compare your answers.

[> page 151 VOCABULARYBANK

2 A Which of the personal qualities discussed in Exercise 1 do you
think are qualities you need to become a millionaire?

“You dont have to
be born rich to be
a millionaire

1 so you want to be a millionaire, but
have you got what it takes? To find out
what millionaires are really like and what
motivates them, the BBC programme
Mind of a Millionaire did a survey.
Psychologists looked at self-made
millionaires to try and understand what
qualities are needed to make a million.
So, what is really important to a millionaire?

ONAU RWN

2 The answer, not surprisingly, is money,
money and more money. Money is more
important than love or marriage. And if
you give a millionaire money, they won't
spend it, they'll invest it to make more
money. But you don't have to be born rich
to be a millionaire. Most millionaires come
from relatively poor backgrounds. And
you don't have to work hard at school
either. A lot of successful entrepreneurs
were lazy at school and didn't get good
results. However, you must have a clear
idea of what you want to do (get rich)
and you really ought to start early. A lot
of millionaires left school early, to start
their own businesses.

B Are the statements 1-6 about millionaires true (T) or false (F)?
1 Most millionaires are born rich.

2 Millionaires think that money is more important than love or
marriage.

They work more than sixty hours a week.

They don't like to work when they’re on holiday.

They do well at school and usually go to university.

6 They like spending money on designer goods.

uh ww

C Read the article and check your answers.

D Work in pairs. Do you agree with the article? Do any of the facts
surprise you? Why?

--- PAGE 44 ---

3 IF you want to be a millionaire, not only
do you have to work hard, but you should
enjoy your work. And you shouldn't take
too many holidays. Most millionaires work
more than sixty hours a week. Half stay
in contact with the office while they're
on holiday and fourteen percent of them
refuse to switch off Having a good
work-life balance is fine for people who
only want to be moderately successful,
but if you're really ambitious, you have
to put in the hours.

4 What are millionaires like as people?
The survey found that they are competitive,
they like taking risks, and they are
aggressive and self-confident They'll do
anything they can to get what they want.

5 Millionaires can break all sorts of rules.
The only thing they mustn't do is break the
law. Surprisingly, most millionaires are
careful spenders. They prefer Gap to
Gucci. Many of them choose not to spend
money on expensive designer clothes
~ they would rather find a bargain on the
high street And they don't spend lots of
money on expensive meals in restaurants
either. They prefer to eat at home. However,
they do like to drive Mercedes and go on
at least three expensive holidays a year.
One last thing: millionaires don’t care what
other people think of them. So, if you want
to be a millionaire, you shouldn't worry
about what other people think of you. Just
do your own thing.

3 A Underline words or phrases in the article that match

meanings 1-6.

1 their family didn’t have much money (paragraph 2)

2 they never stop thinking about work (paragraph 3)

3 having enough time for work and for the things you enjoy
(paragraph 3)

4 work long hours (paragraph 3)

5 find something for a good price (paragraph 5)

6 do what you want without worrying about what other people
think (paragraph 5)

B Work in pairs. Choose two or three of the expressions. Use

them to make sentences about yourself, or people you know.

GRAMMAR

MUST/HAVE TO/SHOULD (OBLIGATION)

4 A Match the words in bold in sentences 1-6 with the meanings

no 00 FF

a)-e). One meaning matches with two sentences.

1 You don’t have to be born rich to be a millionaire.

2 If you want to bea millionaire, you have to work hard.
3 You must have a clear idea of what you want to do.

4 You should enjoy your work.

5 You shouldn’t take too many holidays.

d 6 You mustn’t worry about what other people think of you.

a) It’s a good idea.

b) It's not necessary. You don’t need to be/do this.
c) It’s necessary. You have no choice.

d) It's important that you don’t do this.

e) It's not a good idea.

B (5) 4:1) Fast SPEECH: have to Listen to the pronunciation of
have to /hefta/ in fast speech. Listen and repeat the sentences.

[> page 134 LANGUAGEBANK

5 A Make sentences with the prompts. Use the positive or negative

form of the word in brackets.
1 postmen / get up early in the morning (have)
Postmen have to get up early in the morning.
2 window cleaners / be afraid of heights (must)
3 nurses / be patient and care about other people (should)
4 businessmen often / travel a lot (have)
5 politicians / do their job because they want fame (should)
6 teachers / enjoy working with children (must)
7 doctors / train for several years before they can work (have)
8 teachers / work in the school during the holidays (have)
9 police officers / good communicators / be (have)

[> page 151 VOCABULARYBANK

B Work in pairs. Think about three different jobs. Make sentences
to describe what qualities are/aren’t important for these jobs.
Read your sentences to your partner. Can they guess which job

it is?

A: These people have to be motivated. They should be good
communicators, especially when talking to children. And they have
to be very patient.

B: Teachers?

--- PAGE 45 ---

6 A Workin pairs. Do the quiz. Then check your score on page 160.

B Discuss. How many of the questions did you answer like
a millionaire? Do you agree with the results on page 160? Is
getting rich something which concerns you? Why?/Why not?

VOCABULARY // JEU‘)

CONFUSING WORDS

? Read the vocabulary notes and complete sentences 1 and 2.

Work is what you do to earn money:
What kind of work does he do?

A job is the particular type of work that you do:
Sam's got a job as a waiter.

Job can be plural, but work cannot.

1 I've finished my degree, so I’m looking for a
2 It's not easy to find when you're my age.

8 A Underline the correct alternative in the sentences below. What
is the difference between these words?

1 He suddenly remembered/reminded that he had to go to the bank.

| have to call my boss later. Can you remember/remind me?
I've forgotten/left my keys in the car. | really should get them.
Did you hear/listen that noise?

Can you say that again? I’m sorry, | wasn't listening/hearing.
6 Being ill on holiday isn’t much fun/funny.

uk WN

B Turn to page 160 to check your answers.
[> page 151 VOCABULARYBANK

=>
speakout TIP

To help you remember confusing words and vocabulary, write them in

personalised sentences in your notebook. Write sentences about your
life using some of the words from Exercise 8.

9A Complete questions 1-6 with a suitable word from Exercises 7
and 8.
1 What are the best paid in your country?
2 Is there anything you often like phone numbers or
someone's name?
3 Ifyou carefully, what noises can you hear at the
moment?

4 Do you write notes to yourself about important things?
5 How much did you for your first job? What did you buy?
6 What do you like doing for ? Do you like playing games?

B Work in pairs. Take turns to ask and answer the questions
above.

jw MBA WS

SAL TAM PE

HAVE YOU
GOT WHAT IT

Daa TOBEA

OO

Would you like to be ...
>) a) abit richer
) b) alot richer
>) c) megarich

If you wanted a pair of shoes
that you couldn’t afford,
would you ...
© a) buy them anyway
) b) wait until the sales and
risk losing them
> ©) walk away

How many credit cards do you
carry with you?
© a) One or none
>) b) Two
QO ©) More than two

aN

U1

lo)

AL

If you could just afford to pay

for it, would you splash out

on...

© a) aheated swimming pool

) b) aracehorse

© oc) abig party for all your
friends

Do you most enjoy stories
about...

) a) romance ld
) b) adventure

) oc) mystery

Do you check that your bill
is correct after a meal out?
O a) Yes

>) b) No
QO ©) Only iflm alone

N

CO

What is 9 multiplied by 8?
© a) Did you get the answer
right instantly?
>) b) Or only after doing little
sums in your head?
) c¢) Did you get the wrong
answer?

If a favourite relative left you

a watch that was not your

style, would you...

) a) sell it

© b) keep it to sell on a rainy
day

O ©) keep it to help you
remember them

--- PAGE 46 ---

DREAM JOB CG] used to, would

CP) intonation: emphasis; linking: used to
@ extreme adjectives

Work in pairs. Look at the photos and answer the questions.
1 What are these jobs? Would you like to do them? Why?/Why not?
2 What is your idea of a dream job?

Listen to people talking about their dream jobs. Match
the speaker to the photos.

What problem does each speaker talk about?

. Listen again and answer questions 1-8. Write Nicola (N), Luca (L)
or Amy (A).
Who had a boss who worked in the media?
Who worked for a big company?
Who spent a lot of time by the sea as a child?
Who had to try and invent new ideas for the job?
Who decided to do this job because they saw someone else
doing it?
Who had a different job in the summer and in the winter?
7 Who had a difficult relationship with their boss?
8 Who started to find their job boring?

Check your answers by reading audio script 4.2 on page 167.

uk WN eB

1:3 Nicola

a

EXTREME ADJECTIVES

Find the extreme adjectives in bold in audio script 4.2 on page 167.
Match them to the gradable adjectives below.

1 good: wonderful, amazing, 7 cold: freezing
2 bad: awful, 8 tired: exhausted
3 big: enormous 9 angry:

4 small: tiny 10 interesting:

5 tasty: 11 pretty:

6 hot: 12. difficult:

Complete conversations 1-6 with extreme adjectives.

1 A: The food here tastes so good.
B: Yes, it’s
2 A: It’s over thirty degrees outside today.
B: | know. It’s absolutely
3 A: Was your girlfriend angry about you being late?
B: Yes, she was really
4 A: The view of the lake is really pretty.
B: Yes, it’s , isn’t it?
5 A: Do you find the job interesting?
B: | think it’s absolutely
6 A: It's hard to understand what he's saying.
B: | know. It’s
Listen and mark the stress on

the adjectives. Notice how speaker B emphasises the stressed
syllable in their intonation.

Listen again and shadow speaker B’s response.

--- PAGE 47 ---

GRAMMAR

USED TO, WOULD

5 A Read the texts. What did the children dream
of doing? Have they achieved their dreams?

Childhead dieams

B Look at the underlined words in sentences a)-d)

and match them with rules 1-3.

a) | would invite my cousins and my friends to join

my crew.
b) We used to live in France.
c) | always used to collect small insects.
d) One day | found a butterfly.

sa1nu

2 Use used to or would to talk about a past

and

3 Use used to to talk about a past state.
You cannot use would to talk about a past
state.

1 Use the past simple, not used to or would, to
talk about specific events in the past.

habit. You can also use the past simple.

[> page 134 LANGUAGEBANK

6A Complete the texts. Where possible, use would.
Where neither used to or would are possible, use the
past simple.

It’s every young girl’s dream to be an actress when
she grows up. I! (love) watching beautiful
actresses on television. I was so sure that was
what I wanted to do that I 2 (practise) my
Oscar speech in front of the mirror in the
bathroom. I (use) a shampoo bottle
instead of a microphone, and I* (thank) all
my family and friends, even my three cats, for
helping me!

My family ° (live) in Sheffield, just near the
football stadium, so as a child, I ° (go) to
football matches most weekends. I remember the
first match I went to, my granddad ” (take)
me. I was very young, and I had never seen so
many people in one place at one time. It was quite
frightening, and I don’t think I ® (watch)
the game very much. But I remember that we
won, and the crowd went crazy. After that, every
week I° (ask) Granddad if he had tickets,
and usually he did.

B (2) 44) LINKING: used to Listen and repeat.
Notice the pronunciation of used to /ju:sta/.
Practise saying the sentences.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

| used to play football when | was a kid.
| used to practise every day.

We used to live in London.

| didn’t use to like classical music.

My father used to take me fishing.

| used to ski, but now | snowboard.

We used to go to the cinema a lot.

C Did you use to do any of the things mentioned
above? Tell your partner.

? Work in pairs and discuss.

1

N

w

What were your childhood dreams? Have you
achieved them?

Did you have any interests or hobbies in the past
which relate to your life (job/studies) now? What
were they?

How have your ideas, opinions, hobbies, etc.,
changed? (Think about food you liked/hated as
a child, television programmes you enjoyed etc.)
Are there any things that you used to do, which
you don’t do now? Why did you stop? Would you
do these things again?

As a child, | always used to dream about being
an artist ...

--- PAGE 48 ---

WRITING i C Underline phrases in the letter
A COVERING LETTER; LEARN TO ORGANISE Aaininh sete Hieatl es Its

YOUR IDEAS 1 about (paragraph 2)
2 | want to apply for the job
8 Read the text below and answer the questions. (paragraph 2)
1 What kind of person would be good at this job? 3 | think | would be good for the job
2 Would you like to do this job? Why?/Why not? (paragraph 3)
4 practical experience of doing the
Would you like to travel the world staying in some of the world’s job (paragraph 3)
top holiday resorts for free? A luxury travel company is looking 5 | have shown that | am able to do
for a reviewer to try out top hotels and holiday resorts for one this (paragraph 3)
year. The lucky applicant will be expected to stay in a variety of 6 as soon as you have the opportunity
locations that include Caribbean islands, waterside hotels in (paragraph 4)

Venice, and some of the world’s top ski destinations, as well as
Las Vegas and Buenos Aires. They will be expected to write
about their experiences on the company blog. No formal
qualifications are needed. However, the successful applicant will
be sociable, have great communication skills and, of course, a
passion for travel.

D Underline any other useful phrases.

10 Match the parts of the letter 1-5 with
notes a)-e).

Preparing a covering letter

9 A Read the covering letter. Do you think this person would be
good for the job? Why?/Why not? [EY What qualities are they looking for? Write
three to four points that show you have
these qualities. Use the same words as they
use in the advertisement.

© Dear Matthew Ray, . ———_—_—
[By Address your letter to an individual. Only

1
B rm writing to you regarding your advertisement for a use ‘Dear Sir/Madam’ when you can’t find
professional travel reviewer which saw on www.findajob. out the recipient's name.
com. I would like to submit ar‘application for the position.

Finish with a call to action. What is going to
happen next? Are you going to call them or
3 | As an experienced travel blogger who has spent the last five should they call you?
years travelling around the world, I believe that ‘meet all
the requirements you outline in your advertisement.

Please find my CV attached.

|D | Explain why you are contacting them. What
is the job? Where have you seen it?

Good communicator with excellent language skills: As a

regular travel blogger, over the last few years, I have built [By Use ‘Yours sincerely’ if you know their name

and maintained a wide audience of readers. I have also or ‘Yours faithfully’ if you don’t

published newspaper and magazine articles and given radio

interviews about my travel experiences. I am fluent

in English and French, and also speak a little Russian.

Interest in travel and tourism: In addition to my own travels, 11 Look at the job advertisements on
I worked for six months for a tour bus company in Australia, page 161 and write a covering letter

where I had hands-ort'experience of tour guiding. for one of the jobs. Use the sample

ee ability in website management: As well as letter and useful phrases to help you.
maintaining my own website, consisting of a journal and
video weblog, with up-to-date photos and stories of my
travels, I have helped to manage the website for a youth
hostel in Ireland.

If you require any further information, or would like to
arrange an interview, please call me on 07788658429 or email
me at mjdaley@yahoo.com. I look forward to hearing from
you at your earliest convenience.

5 | Yours sincerely,

Megan Daley

B Is the wording of the letter formal or informal? Find examples
of expressions which tell you this.

--- PAGE 49 ---

4.3 )) THAT’'SAGOOD IDEA — Qreseenen

@ sentence stress

@ business

VOCABULARY 3 A Look at the phrases in the table.

BUSINESS Listen to the conversation again and
tick any of the phrases you hear.
1 A Workin pairs. Discuss. Would you consider starting your

own business? What kind of business would you start? Is there Giving opinions
anything stopping you from doing it? | (really) feel that ...
B Complete the questions with words from the box. The way | see things, i
The way | see it, ...
fired salary work compete runs idea interview charge Commenting on other opinions
1 Do you know anyone who their own company? (don't) see what you mean.
2 Have you ever been in of a team of people? Exactly!
m not sure that | agree, actually. /
3 Have you ever been out of ? , ; :
. - 5 m not sure (that’s a good idea).
4 When did you last go for a job ? ‘m1 notsure about that:
5 Have you ever had to with others for a job? think that's a great idea.
6 Which jobs earn a high ? That’s a good point.
7 What kinds of things does someone have to do to get That sounds good.
from their job? That's OK by me.
8 Can you think of reasons why a business might fail? Suggestions
C Take turns to ask and answer the questions above. What about ... ?/ How about ... ?

Let's focus on...
| suggest we think about ...

FUNCTION ! | think we should think about ...

How about if we (call it) ... ?
REACHING AGREEMENT Why don’t we (call it) ... ?

2 IO} 4.5 Listen to a team having a meeting to decide how to set B Check your answers in the audio
up a new café business. Write some notes about their decisions. script on page 167.

Setting up a new café: [> page 134 LANGUAGEBANK
Type of food? Name? Location?

--- PAGE 50 ---

4 A Put the words in the correct order
to make sentences and questions.

1

w

decide /1 ion / rare! we: think 6 A Read the task and write down some ideas.

a/should

good /a/ that's / point

you / see / mean / what / |
suggest / location / the /on/1/
focus / we

fine / that’s / me / by

sure / I'm / that / agree / not /|
we / about / don't / it / why /
think /?

business / a/ the / about / what /
for / name /?

B (5) 416) seNTENCE STRESS Listen
to the phrases. Which words are
stressed?

C Listen again and repeat.

LEARN TO

MANAGE A DISCUSSION

5A Complete the underlined phrases
for managing a discussion.

1

BD)4

First of we need to decide
on the location.
Let's on the ideas we had

for the location.
So, moving on to the next ,
what kind of food are we going to
serve?

recap: a Portuguese café
selling cakes and lunches, located
near the station.
| think we need to come to
the type of café we're establishing.
Let's up what we've decided.

_ Listen and check your

answers.

C Cover up Exercise 5A. Which phrase

would you use for these situations?

1

he end of a meeting to go over
everything that has been discussed?
when you want to discuss the next
issue?

o review what has been discussed
so far?

o start a meeting and talk about
he first point?

0 get everybody to talk about the
same thing?

o return to a point that was
discussed previously?

TO PROMOTE TOURISM

You are going to set up a tour company to promote tourism

in your town/city/country (or the town/country where you are

studying). You need to decide the following:

O the name and location of the company

O what type of tours you will organise (themed tours/language
tours/sports tours, etc.) and where they will go

O how you will promote tourism

O how the company will be different from other tour companies

B Work in groups. Read your roles and come up with a plan for
the business. You have five minutes.

Student A: It’s your job to keep the meeting focused. Try to cover all
the points.

Student B: Make sure you make notes about any decisions which
are made. You will be the group’s spokesperson and will have to
sum up at the end of the meeting.

Student C: Try to come up with as many ideas as possible.

C When you are ready, start the discussion like this.
A: Shall we start? First of all, ...

D Tell the other groups about your business plan. Which group
do you think has the best plan?

--- PAGE 51 ---

)) GAVIN AND STACEY

Work in pairs. Answer the questions. Watch the DVD. What is the main problem Gavin has during his
1 Do you enjoy watching comedy first day at work?
programmes? Why?/Why not? Match DVD extracts 1-5 to the correct responses a)-e).
2 Which ones are popular in your 1 Mr Davies, good to see you again. b
SSunieey? 2 Did you get your welcome pack?
3 Which comedy programmes do & Ready when you are,
a tl 4 Now here's somebody you've not
Read about the programme. met yet.
What type of things do you think 5 Parcel for you.
Gavin needs to learn on his first a) Oh, thanks.
day at work? Who do you think b) Please, call me Huw.
he will meet?

c) Hi. Nice to meet you.
d) Yeah, | think so.
e) OK, let’s show you around.

Answer the questions.

What does Huw, the boss, give Gavin?
When does Gavin say he will call his mother?

How many phone calls does Gavin receive?

What does Uncle Bryn bring for Gavin?

What is the message on the balloon? Who do you think sent
it to him?

Watch the DVD again to check.

uk WN eB

Discuss. How do you think Gavin will feel at the end of
his first day at work?

Gavin and Stacey is a BBC
programme about a young
couple. Gavin comes from Essex,
near London, and Stacey comes
from Cardiff, Wales. After a
long-distance relationship
conducted online and by
telephone, they eventually get
married and Gavin moves to
Wales. In this episode, Gavin
starts a new job. On his first day,
his family want him to do well
and be happy at work.

--- PAGE 52 ---

out aday inthelife... back your daily routine
[P48 Listen to someone Read about a day in the life of a gym instructor. Is his daily
describing a typical day in her life. routine similar to yours? How is it different?

Do you think she likes her job? VAIAISASISSSSSDADAAAAAAAAASSS SST?

NN

Read the key phrases below. | work as a gym instructor in a sports centre. | get up at 5a.m. every
Complete each phrase by adding Y morning and make a cup of coffee. | can’t function until I've had my
one word. ,, coffee! | drive to work - it takes about fifteen minutes on a good
// day - usually getting there at about 5.40. The first thing | do is
PHRASES Y switch on the lights and the air conditioning if it’s summer (heating
Y if it’s winter), and then the radio. We have the radio on all day
usually wake up _ (about) 6.30. ty ecause our clients like listening to the news and the music.
have to leave home by 8.30 at _ | The sports centre opens at 6a.m
4 he. U work in a team of four, although only two of us are ever in the
The first | do when | get to 4 gym at the same time. The instructors all wear sports clothes.
work/schoolis ... It’s important to be comfortable because we sometimes need
‘o show new clients how to use the machines. Apart from this,
n the afternoon | to catch ieee :
our other tasks are quite simple: we check that everyone has
upon... heir membership card when they come in, and we check that
usually [make some deliveries/ he machines are clean and safe.
do some shopping/...Jonmy have a one-hour break for lunch, and | usually do two more hours
home. after lunch. | go home at about 2.30.
- ry to be by (about) 7 o'clock. The best part of the job is meeting people. Our clients range from
i just cook supper and watch eighteen-year-old body builders to eighty-year-olds who come to
some television. exercise and chat. I've never had any problems at the sports centre.
It’s a really nice job, though it doesn't pay very well. In the evenings
| relax by reading a book and cooking for myself, and I’m usually in

Listen again to check. bed by 9.30p.m.

Prepare to tell other students about Frank Carduna
a normal day in your life. Write notes
about your typical day. What do you

have in common? Write about a typical day in your life using the sentence

+ hours of work/studying starters in bold in the text and the key phrases to help. Try

* tasks you have to do to include two or three pieces of information that make your

* people you spend your day with day different from everybody else’s. Alternatively, look at the

* problems and challenges pictures on page 47. Imagine what a day in the life of this person Ps

+ howyou relax would be like, and write about it. 5
yet

* the best parts of your day os

--- PAGE 53 ---

A.5 (( LOOKBACK

@ REACHING
AGREEMENT

5A Complete the conversations.

© PERSONAL
QUALITIES !

© EXTREME
ADJECTIVES

3A Replace the underlined words

L Work in pairs. Student A:
describe a word/phrase from the
box in your own words, starting
with | am/like/enjoy, etc. Don’t
say the word/phrase. Student B:
listen and try to guess the word
or phrase.

hard-working indecisive
arisk taker a good leader
ambitious competitive
think outside the box

a good communicator

A: | enjoy working and want to
succeed in what | do.

B: You're motivated?

A: Correct. Your turn to describe a
word.

© MUST/HAVE TO/

SHOULD
(OBLIGATION)

2 A Underline the correct
alternative to complete the
sentences.

1 | have to/mustn’t call my
mother today. It’s her birthday.

2 | really must/mustn’t do more

exercise. I’m so unfit.

I'm lucky because | don’t have

to/shouldn’t get up early in the

morning. I’m a student.

4 | think you should/shouldn’t
study harder. Your exam
results weren't very good.

w

uw

taking risks, or you will never
live your dreams.

| shouldn’t/don'’t have to
waste so much time on the
computer. I'll never finish my
work.

a

B Complete the sentences so
that they are true for you.

1 | have to ... this evening.

2 | really must do more ...

3 I’m lucky because | don’t have
WO) sce

4 |think you should... because...

5 You mustn't worry about ...

6 | shouldn't waste so much
time...

C Compare your ideas in pairs.

You mustn’t/should be afraid of

in the sentences below with
extreme adjectives in the box.

brilliant fascinating awful
exhausted tiny boiling
impossible delicious furious

1 I'm very tired. | didn’t sleep
well.

2 Shall we open a window? It’s
very hot in here.

3 My boss just called. He’s very.
angry.

4 | find phrasal verbs very"
difficult to remember.

5 The holiday was very good, but
the weather was very bad.

6 How can you work in this
office? It’s very small.

7 | find astronomy very"
interesting.

8 Did you cook this? It’s very
tasty.

B Work in pairs and take turns

to test each other.

A: Very big.

B: Enormous.

A: Correct. Your turn.

© USED TO, WOULD

4A Replace the past simple with

used to or would where possible.

Where both are possible, choose

would.

1 My family lived in Paris, but we
moved when | was a teenager.

2 | spent a lot of time with my

grandparents when | was

younger.

For my first job, | washed

dishes in a restaurant.

| didn’t think money was

important. Now | have lots of

bills to pay.

5 We had a lot more free time
before we had children.

6 My best friend at school lived
just across the road from me.

w

cy

B Change four of the sentences
so that they are true for you.

C Compare with a partner. Find
three things that you both used
to do as children, but you don’t
do now.

1 A: Thewaylsee___ things,
all cars should be banned
from city centres.

B: E xactly .

2 A: | really f_eel_ that
we need to look at
immigration.

B: That's a good p oint

3 A: The way I see it, the
company is making too
much money.

B: | don’t see what you
mean.

4 A:|think__ we should ask
for more money.

, ure that
B: I’m not s l agree,
actually.

5 A: | suggest we try to meet
again next week.

B: That's _ fine by me.

B Work in pairs and practise the
conversations.

6 Work in groups. Look at the
questions below and discuss.
Try to reach agreement on each
answer.

1 Should there be a limit to the
number of hours people can work
in one week?

2 Should there be a minimum
wage? What should it be?

3 How long should men/women
be allowed to stay off work after
they have children?

4 Should everyone be allowed
to work from home at least
once a week?

5 Should employees be
allowed to wear to work
whatever clothes they want?

--- PAGE 54 ---

SPEAKING

LISTENING

READING
WRITING

=

I3M)0s

SsUOI

5.1 Talk about inventions over the last 100 years 5.2 Present and answer IB |B |

questions on your area of expertise 5.3 Explain/Solve problems

5.4 Present anew machine , INTERVIEWS

5.2 Listen to people answering difficult questions 5. inversations ©) Are you good at

about technical problems 5.4 Watch a BBC progra 1 _—__ solving problems?
» ss

acar and two people
5.1 Read about some low technology solutions

5.1 Write an advantages/disadvantages es

--- PAGE 55 ---

5.1

LOW TECH SOLUTIONS

L Work in pairs. Discuss the questions.

1

In general, do you like or dislike
new technology and gadgets like

CG) comparatives/superlatives
CP) syllable stress

@ technology

technology is always the best? From high-speed
trains to high-speed internet, you could be forgiven
for thinking that faster is always better (not to
mention, more efficient and more economical).

“
Why is it that people seem to think that the newest NY
\

ebooks, tablets and phones? j
2 Can you think of ways in which We decided to investigate a few simpler, more y) 2 /
technology has made our lives low-tech solutions to the world’s problems. ns
better/worse? Be /
3 Are there any problems which

technology has helped to solve?
Give examples.

2 A Lookat the prompts below. What
information do you think could go in
the gaps to describe the problems?
Use the pictures to help you.

1

New tends to make things
faster and more efficient.

Popular entertainment (theatre,
cinema, music concerts, exhibitions)
is often and based in cities.
In many villages in Asia and Africa,
access to is still a huge
problem.

The citizens of Bogota, Colombia
wanted young people to have more
access to

B Read the text to check your
answers.

3 A Workin pairs. Answer the
questions.

1

How is the Rural Academy (slow
theatre) different from other
theatre companies?

Meet the slow theatre

Much of our popular entertainment
these days is action-packed,
expensive and based in cities.

So, the Rural Academy decided
they wanted to offer an alternative. a
Touring the United States, they
take a horse-drawn theatre, and

a bicycle-powered silent cinema
on the road with them. They want
to celebrate and call attention to
life in more rural locations, in opposition to what they see as the global
urbanisation of our culture, economy, media and art. By using a carriage
pulled by horses, rather than a vehicle that runs on petrol, they offer

a less expensive, low-tech alternative entertainment, which they hope
will include more people and move at a slightly slower pace.

The roundabout r=
water pump 1
Access to a clean water pee
supply is still one of the
biggest problems for
people living in rural
villages in Asia and
Africa. To try and solve
the problem, a company
in South Africa has
invented a way to use
children’s high energy levels to help pump water from underground.

ber At

2 Why might people living in rural The Playpump is a water pump that is powered when the children use sre
areas appreciate this type of the roundabout. As they play, the water is pumped from below the | <
theatre? ground into a storage tank. Before the pumps were installed, many hie

3 How does the Playpum p help young girls had to spend hours of their day walking to collect water, oe | >
children to solve the problem of rather than going to school. With the new pumps, however, the girls — f=

don't need to miss school, so they get a much better education.
access to water? ~

4 How has the pump changed the Bus stop libraries
lives of the young girls in particular? in Bogota
5 How has the invention of the ebook Tiheunventiontof tieveboolcnas
changed how people read? meant that books are now slightly
6 Where have they put the new cheaper and a lot lighter to carry.

libraries in Bogota?

But in Bogota, Colombia, they had
a far better idea for helping people

B Discuss. What do you think of the
solutions suggested? Which idea do
you like best? Can you think of some
other solutions to these problems?

to read on the go. The city wanted
to improve the access that young
people had to books, but not by
buying new tablets. They decided
to install colourful book libraries
around the city, in the parks and

at bus stops. What could be better
than to sit in the sunshine and read
a book while waiting for your bus?

--- PAGE 56 ---

GRAMMAR

COMPARATIVES AND SUPERLATIVES

4 A Read the article again. Underline examples of
comparatives and superlatives.

B Look at your examples and complete the rules.
How do we form the comparatives and superlatives
of common adjectives?

sa1nu

1 Adjectives with one syllable
comparatives: add

superlatives: add

2 Adjectives with two or more syllables
comparatives: add

superlatives: add

C Look at the sentences below and complete the
rules with small or big.

a) Entertainment has become a lot/much/far more

expensive.

b) Technology has made books a little/a little bit/

slightly cheaper.

sa1nu

1 Use quantifiers a lot/much/far to talk
about differences.

2 Use quantifiers a little/a little bit/slightly to
talk about differences.

[> page 136 LANGUAGEBANK

5 Complete the statements with the prompts in
brackets.

1

The invention of the bicycle made it

(lot/easy) for people to travel from one village

to another, to meet new people.

The world has become a (much/safe) place
to live since the invention of antibiotics. People
are (far/healthy) now than 100 years ago.
The invention of the washing machine has meant
that it is (lot/quick) for people to wash
their clothes. | think it’s (good) invention
of the last century.

Although we have computers, paper is still

(cheap) and (flexible) way to record the
written word.
Electricity is (important) invention

because without it many of the other things we
have would not have been possible.

The invention of the telephone and the computer
have meant that we are (much/busy) now
than we were in the past.

VOCABULARY i

TECHNOLOGY

6 A Workin pairs. Put the words/phrases in the box

into the correct word web.

electricity nuclear power antibiotics
vaccinations computer networks motorbikes
genetic engineering washing machine

vacuum cleaner space travel commercial aeroplanes
solar power communications satellites

electricity

medicine/science

IT (information technology)

B Work in pairs. Can you add any more words to
each word web?

C SYLLABLE STRESS Look at the words/phrases

above and underline the main stress(es). Sometimes

there can be more than one per word/phrase.
electricity nuclear power

D (2) 5.1 Listen and check. Then listen again and
repeat.

[> page 152 VOCABULARYBANK

? A Workin pairs. Choose an invention from the last

100 years. Write two or three sentences to describe
how this invention has changed our lives. Don’t say
what the invention is.

This invention made it much easier to travel from one

place to another. Even people in poor societies can use
this invention because it does not need petrol.

B Read your sentences to other students. Can they

guess the invention?

C Discuss which invention you think has been the
best/worst? Why?

--- PAGE 57 ---

WRITING

AN ADVANTAGES/DISADVANTAGES ESSAY; LEARN TO
USE DISCOURSE MARKERS

8 A What do you think are the main advantages and disadvantages
of technology in everyday life? Write a list.

B Read the model essay. Does it mention any of your ideas?

The advantages and disadvantages
of modern technology

1 | It is easy to see the advantages of modern technology in our
everyday lives. Technology has given us mobile phones,
computers, televisions and many other useful things. However,
most modern inventions come with a price — maybe social or
environmental — so we need to look at both sides of the story.

| 2 | One of the main advantages of modern technology can be
seen in medical science. The discoveries of antibiotics and

vaccinations have saved millions of lives around the world.
In addition to this, modern technology has made industry
more efficient.

3 | On the other hand, modern technology is responsible for
the development of weapons, which have caused a lot of
destruction. Another disadvantage is that it makes us lazy.
Nowadays, many people spend their lives sitting in front
of computer screens. This is a development that surely has
negative effects on our mental and physical health, making us
more isolated and less active.

In my opinion, modern technology is a good thing. In general,
the advantages outweigh the disadvantages. Of course
there are drawbacks, but it is important to remember that
technology itself is not the problem. The problem is that we
use technology without always thinking about the harmful
consequences.

C Match paragraphs 1-4 with descriptions a)-d).
a) discussion of disadvantages
b) conclusion

c) introduction ql
d) discussion of advantages

D Work in pairs. Complete the guidelines for writing an essay
with the expressions in the box.

personal opinions examples notes beginning logical order

1 Sort out the facts - make of all the relevant information
you have on the subject.

2 Plan your argument - organise your notes and arrange the ideas
ina

3 Give your essay an appropriate . Describe what you are
planning to say.

4 Decide how many paragraphs you need for your argument. Each
paragraph should discuss one point. Use to support your
arguments.

5 Write a logical conclusion. Though the style of the essay is
generally formal and impersonal, this might be the place to
include some

9 A Look at the underlined words and

phrases in the essay. Put them in the
correct place in the table.

introduce advantages

The most important advantage is ...
One of the main advantages

introduce disadvantages
The main disadvantage is ...
The problem is that

contrasting ideas
Although, ... However

additional reasons

And another thing, ...

As well as that,... Another disadvantage

personal opinion/conclusion
In general,.... !n my opinion
As far as I’m concerned, ...

B Underline the correct alternatives.

Satellite TV: good or bad?

More and more people are
watching satellite television.

1The main advantage / As well as that
is that you can choose exactly what
you want to watch, and in addition
to this / however you can watch
programmes in other languages.
3However, / Although this means
that whereas people used to talk
about programmes with colleagues
and friends, now they usually don’t
watch the same programmes.

4On the other hand / And another
thing, there is too much choice.
There are so many programmes to
choose from that people can’t
decide what to watch. °This means
that / As far as I’m concerned, they
watch too much television.

®In my opinion / The problem is that,
Satellite clevision is a good thing,
as it gives people more choice.
7However, / In general, people need
to be careful that they choose their
programmes carefully.

10 choose one of the topics below and

write an essay about the advantages
and disadvantages of it. Look back at
Exercises 8 and 9 to help you.

* modern technology in everyday life
* owning a car/bicycle

* playing computer games

* using a digital camera

* using email/text messages

* cheap flights

--- PAGE 58 ---

(G) question tags
@ intonation: question tags
(Vv) information; word building: adjec

Read the sentences below. In which
sentence is wonder a verb? In which

Match photos A-F to the questions below. sentence is it a noun?
1 Is it possible to surf a tidal wave? a) | wonder if anyone has ever tried to
2 Why is snow cold? surf a tidal wave.
3 Is there an easy way to prove the Earth is round? b) | can name the seven wonders of
4 Why do onions make you cry? the world.
5 Is arainbow hot or cold? Underline the correct alternative
6 Why are sumo wrestlers so fat? to complete the sentences. Is the

oo F : correct answer a noun or a verb?
Work in pairs. How many questions above can you answer in

two minutes? 1 The police officer continued his
investigation/wonder/inquire into
the robbery.

Turn to page 161 and check your answers.

2 Didn't you get my email? You didn’t
response/look into/reply.
3 We had a very interesting discuss/
INFORMATION debate/wonder about the death
penalty.
Match the pairs of verbs in the box with situations 1-5. 4 I've nearly finished my research/
- - investigate/reply into nuclear
questionfwonder discuss/debate respegd/reply narticles:
research investigate inquire/look into argue/quarrel 5 When | hear about all these social
1 Someone tells you something. You are not sure you agree. problems, | have to inquire/question/
question/wonder respond the education system.
2 Someone writes you a letter. "espond/reply 6 You want a job here? No problem.
3 There is an interesting topic in class. discuss/debate My cousin is the boss. I'll inquiry/
4 You disagree with someone and talk angrily with them. argue/quarrel debate/look into it for you.
5 You are writing a thesis for your Master’s degree. research/investigate 7 !twasa silly respond/quarrel/argue.
6 You need to find some information, e.g. about cinema times Now theyare irene agai.

or to book a table. inquire/look into

--- PAGE 59 ---

LISTENING GRAMMAR

3 A Work in groups and discuss. QUESTION TAGS

1 How do you prefer to find information, on the internet, in books

5A Complete questions 1-6. Then
or by asking people? What does it depend on?

look at audio script 5.2 on page 168

2 What type of questions do children ask? Think of some examples.

They sometimes ask difficult questions like: ‘Why is snow cold?’
B Read a review of a book about questions children ask their

to check.

1

Round windows are stronger,
they?

parents. How did the author get the idea for the book? Are any of 2 No, it’s not that many, it?
your questions included in the examples from the book? 3. It depends whose head, it?
4 Nothing happens, it?
5 They got old, they?
Questions Daddy can’t answer 6 John Lennon went off with Yoko
It all began with a question asked by Dean, a four-year-old boy: Ono,_____ihe?

‘Why do ships have round windows?’ His father didn’t know. And
when his sister started behaving badly, Dean asked another
question: ‘Why can’t we just cook her?’ On a long drive the boy
wondered why the road was so loud. His father replied, ‘Because
the people who live next to the road have their vacuum cleaners
on.’ The boy’s inquiries kept coming: ‘Why is the sky blue? Are
rainbows hot or cold? What was it like living in the 1940s? What
would hurt more — getting run over by a car or getting stung by
a jellyfish? Why do police officers like doughnuts?”

Eventually, Jamieson decided
to write down the questions.
He thought it might be fun
one day to show them to his
son. Then he had a better
idea: he’d research the
answers. Some people might
do their investigations on the
internet. Not Mr Jamieson.
He contacted experts ranging
from astronomers to Buddhist
monks, to scientists, to
magicians, and asked lots of
questions. He later turned
these — and the experts’
responses — into a book: Father
Knows Less.

B Read the rules about question
tags. Which rules are exemplified in
1-6 in Exercise 6A?

Rule 2 is shown in question number 3.
It uses doesn't.

sa1nu

1 Use question tags to confirm
information.

2 To form a question tag,
repeat the auxiliary verb. For
example, use do or does for the
present. Use will or won't for
the future.

3 After the auxiliary verb, use a
pronoun (e.g. he, she, it, they).
4 lf the sentence is positive, the
question tag is negative.

5 If the sentence is negative,
the question tag is positive.

[> page 136 LANGUAGEBANK

6 Look at the statements below and
complete the question tags.

1 You're Italian, aren’t_ you?
4 A Read five questions from the book Father Knows Less. Try to 2 Youaren’ta doctor, are _ you?
answer them. Compare your ideas with other students. 3 You don’t smoke, you?
4 You playa musicalinstrument,

How many hairs are there on the human head?

Why are the windows on ships always round?

Why is there war?

Why did The Beatles break up?

What happens when your plane flies over a volcano?

you?

You didn’t know any of the other
students before, you?
Our teacher hasn't taught you
before, she?

7 You will be here tomorrow,
you?
B [2) 5.2 Listen to some people trying to answer the questions 8 You went to bed late last night, __
in Exercise 4A. Are their answers the same as your ideas? yOu:
9 You've travelled a lot, you?

C Listen again and complete the notes.

1 Ships’ round windows:

2 Number of hairs on a human head:

3 Aplane flies over a volcano:

4 The Beatles broke up:

5 Reasons for war: different ideologies, a sense of honour,

10

You were good at sport when you
were a child, you?

--- PAGE 60 ---

? A (2)53 INTONATION: question tags Listen to two questions.
Notice how the intonation goes down when the speaker is sure of
the answer. Notice how the intonation goes up when the speaker is
not sure.

1 You're Italian, aren't you? (the speaker knows the answer)

2 You aren't a doctor, are you? (the speaker is not sure of the answer)
B 1)54 Listen to the questions in Exercise 6. Which answers is
the speaker sure about? Listen and repeat the questions, using
the same intonation.

C Work in pairs. Choose six questions to ask your partner. Make
sure your intonation is correct in the question tags.

A: You play a guitar, don’t you?

B: Yes, | do. | play bass in a band.

8 Workin groups and follow instructions 1-4 below.

1 Think of one subject each that you know a lot about. Write your
topics on a piece of paper.

tennis, Japanese cars, hip hop

2 Exchange papers with another group.

3 Think of statements about the subjects. Use question tags.

Rafael Nadal is the best tennis player in history, isn’t he? The most

popular Japanese car is the Toyota, isn’t it?

4 Read your statements to the first group. Are they correct?

VOCABULARY / 80K)

WORD BUILDING: ADJECTIVES

9 A Read the text below. How was the ice cream cone invented?

For over a hundred years ice cream was sold mainly in ‘Q
dishes. Then one day, a creative ice cream seller turned
a hopeless situation into a profitable one. In 1904, ata
festival, he ran out of spoons and dishes. He bought some  * i
wafers from a vendor next to him and put the ice cream \f
into them. The customers loved them and the idea spread ‘
quickly. The world has been thankful ever since!

B Underline four adjectives in the text and add them to the word

web below. Can you think of other examples of adjectives that fit

these patterns?

messy hairy

responsible

biological

lovable

poetic

homeless painful

peaceful

effective

useless explosive

=>
speakout TIP

Use L1.L1 is your First Language. Some
suffixes in your L1 might have similar
meanings to suffixes in English. For
example, the Italian -ivo/a means the same
as the English -ive. Can you think of any
examples from your language?

10 Complete the text. Add suffixes to
the words in brackets.

The city of Detroit, USA
was famous for its
valuable (tue) car
industry. In the early
days, the city was
respons! Ieesponse) for
the majority of cars in
the USA, and Detroit's
streets were full of cars.
A police officer called
William Potts saw
that the organigatio
of the traffic was’
(hope) and the traffic
was very slow. So, in
he developed an
effective ctive ° (effect) system
of lights lights to regulate the
flow of cars. He used
the same colours as
the railway system and put the lights in
a tower so that it would be °©@S!€! (ease)
for drivers to see them even on °_ rainy
(rain) days. Potts’s system was very successful
(success). When other countries realised
how ®useful (use) it was, the system
spread all over the world.

Qpeless

411A Complete the words by adding
suffixes.
Find someone who:
has a peaceful hobby.
is hope at maths.
is a good, care driver.
is quite mess at home.
thinks he/she is quite creat
is quite knowledge about
politics.

au RWN RB

B Work in groups. Ask and answer
questions about the information above.

You've got a peaceful hobby, haven't you?
[> page 152 VOCABULARYBANK

--- PAGE 61 ---

( F ) polite requests
(P) intonation: polite requests

5.3 )) IT’S OUT OF ORDER

@ problems and solutions

WE REGRET Tay an

~~ TS TEMPORART)

VOCABULARY

PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

FUNCTION

POLITE REQUESTS

L A Think of two pieces of technology you have used 2A () 5.5. Listen to four conversations. What is the

in the last twenty-four hours. Did you have any
problems with them? What problems can you have
with them?

B Work in pairs. Look at the photos. What is the
problem in each case?

C Look at the phrases in bold. Are they problems
(P) or solutions (S)? Which phrases can you use to
talk about the problems in pictures A-E above?
1 It's broken down.
It needs recharging.
It's out of order.
It needs fixing.
There is no reception (for my phone).
Try switching it off (and on again).
It keeps making this strange noise.
It’s crashed/frozen.
9 It doesn’t work (any more).
10 We have to sort it out.
11 Save it onto amemory stick.
12 Shall! print it for you?

D Work in pairs and answer the questions.

OnNaAU RWN

1 Have any of these problems happened to you
or anyone you know recently?

2 How did you feel when it happened?

3 How did you try to solve the problem?

problem in each case?

B Read questions 1-8. Which can you answer?

Listen again to check.

1 Inconversation 1, what question does the man ask?

2 Where does the woman suggest that he goes?

3 In conversation 2, what does the woman ‘keep
losing’?

4 What does the man suggest?

5 Inconversation 3, what does the vacuum cleaner
‘keep making’?

6 Does the woman give the man instructions about
what to do to fix his vacuum cleaner?

7 Inconversation 4, what does the man ask for?

8 Who does the man need to speak to?

C Complete the extracts in the table with the
correct words.

Could you 4 the line, please?
a me a refund?

Could you tell me who | should * to?
what the 4 is?

Do you know what the problem is?
if there’s another °
somewhere?

Would you mind 6 at it for me?
him for me?

C ()5.6 Listen and repeat the requests.
[> page 136 LANGUAGEBANK

--- PAGE 62 ---

LEARN TO | SPEAKING

RESPOND TO REQUESTS 5 A Workin pairs. Read your role and think about

3 A Read some conversation extracts from
Exercise 2. Complete the responses with the
phrases in the box.

Yes,lcan I’mnot sure I’m afraid | can’t
Yes, of course (x2) Of course not Sure/OK
Let me have a look

1 M:Do you know if there’s another machine
some ene | tay need to get some money.
W:Hm here might be one in the
shopping centre.
2 W:Would you mind looking at it for me?
M: Sure.
3 W:Do you know what the problem is?
mM: Let me have a look
4W; Enea tell me what the problem is, sir?
mM. . It keeps making a funny noise. And it’s
just not working properly.
5 W:Could you hold the line, please?
M: Yes, of course

gated #83 Neate mea refund?

Yes ell, cot a 1you mT me who | should speak to?
v You need to speak to the manager.

i OK. Would you mind calling him for me?
Wi course course HAT
just call him.

B Read audio script 5.5 on page 168 to check.

4 A Make polite requests and responses with the
prompts in brackets.
1 A: | can’t concentrate. (Would / mind / turn /
music down)?
B: Sure. Sorry about that.

2 A: | need to speak to the manager. (Do / know / if /

anyone in the office)?
; Let me have a look.
: I'm afraid Mr Soul isn’t here at the moment.
: (Do / know / when / coming back)?
: (not / sure). Do you want me to check?
Thank you.
: (Could / tell / how / machine works)? | don’t
know how to turn it on.
: (Yes / course).
5 A: |need to take this machine to the repair
service. (Would / mind / help / me)?
B: (course / not). Leave it here.
6 A: My computer has frozen. (Could / tell / who /1/
speak / to)?
B: OK. (Let / have / look).

B 1) 5.7 Listen to check your answers.

C INTONATION: polite requests Does the speaker's
voice start high or low? Listen again and repeat the
requests copying the polite intonation.

rPearowarge

the phrases you are going to use. Then role-play
the situation below.

Student B

You need to call your
sister but you can’t get
any reception on your
Student A 4) phone. Ask Student A
if he/she knows where

Tell Student B that you can get reception.

you have reception on
your phone. N
Suggest that he/she

ries standing outside. | | You still can’t get any
reception. Ask Student
4 A if you can borrow his/

her phone to send a
text message.

Tell Student B he/
she can borrow your
phone to make the N

phone call. —SSSS
Thank Student A for his/
her help.

B Change roles and role-play the situation below.
Student A

You can’t get the
printer to work. Ask

Student B if he/she Student B
can help you.

Suggest Student A tries
turning it off and then
on again. Ask if that has
worked.

It still doesn’t work.
Ask Student B if
he/she knows of Ny
other printers in the

(building, | Tell Student A he/she
v4 can use your printer.
Thank Student B for
his/her help.

C Choose one or two situations from Exercises 4
and 5. Write a conversation using the flow charts
above to help. Then role-play it with a partner.

--- PAGE 63 ---

©!) MAN VERSUS MACHINE

D PREVIEW 3 watch the DVD to see if you were right. Number the

events in the correct order.
L Work in pairs and answer the questions. : 1
a) The men jump over James's car.
b) James arrives at the Liver building.
c) James checks his speed.
d) The men jump over people eating at a
restaurant.

1 Look at the person on page 65. What type of sport
is he doing?
2 Would you like to try this sport? Why?/Why not?

2 Read about the programme. Who do you think will
win the race? Why? e) James stops at a red traffic light.

4 watch the DVD again. What does James May say?
Complete the phrases.

1 As we can see, it’s a very pretty car, but is it

Top Gear

Top Gear is the BBC’s international any r)

award-winning television series about motor 2 I'm going to have a race, and it’s against the latest
vehicles, mainly cars. More than 350 million French development in urban transport solutions:
viewers worldwide enjoy watching the a couple of young men in silly

presenters with their quirky, humorous style. 3 Parkour: that’s a French invention, and involves
On the show they compare and test-drive that sort of thing. Running around the

cars, and organise all kinds of crazy races. leaping across buildings and benches.

In this programme, James May, possibly the 4 Come on - we're not all |

slowest driver in Great Britain, challenges two 5 | must have averaged ten or twelve miles an hour.

freerunners to a race in Liverpool city centre. I should :
James has to drive six miles towards the Liver
building in the city centre in a Peugeot 207.
The two teenagers who try to beat him will

run and jump over buildings, taking a much
more direct route. Who do you think will get ¥
there first? -

a

They are not here. No sign of combat trousers
man. I've !

--- PAGE 64 ---

Kout present anew machine

yriteback an advertisement

5 A Workin pairs. Answer the questions and

complete the tasks.

1 Write a list of things you have to do every day.

2 Are there any things on this list which you don’t
enjoy? Could a machine do them for you?

3. Invent a machine which would help you do one of
the things. Draw a picture of your machine.

B 9.8 Listen to someone talking about a new
machine. What is the invention? What does it do?

C Listen again and tick the key phrases he uses.

[PHRASES

I’m going to tell you about ...
Basically, ...

The way it works is this.

It works like this ...

First of all, ....

Then/Also, you can...

All you have to dois ...

Make sure you ...

The best thing about it is that ...

D Prepare and practise a short presentation about
your new machine. Use your picture and the useful
phrases to explain how it works.

E Present your ideas to the class. Which invention
do you think is the best?

G A Read the advertisement and answer the
questions. What is the musical shower? How does
it work?

3

If you like listening to music when you have No By
a shower, then you might already have a stereo 7S
in your bathroom. But imagine how much

better it would be if your shower-head also —~9
had an MP3 player attached to it

It will download your favourite tunes, or radio
programmes at night. Then in the morning,

your shower will automatically play your

favourite tunes for you. Try our musical shower

There's no better way to start the day.

B Write an advertisement (advert) for your
invention (120-180 words). Use the advert above
and the key phrases to help.

--- PAGE 65 ---

5.5 (( LOOKBACK

© COMPARATIVES/
SUPERLATIVES _
L A Look at the information and

complete sentences (1-4) using
the prompts in brackets.

100 years ago in the US: the average
life expectancy was forty-seven years,
only eight percent of homes hada
phone, the maximum speed limit in
most cities was ten miles per hour, the
average wage was twenty-two cents
per hour, and ninety percent of all
doctors had no college education.

1 100 years ago, people didn’t

live as they do today.
(long)
2 It used to be to

communicate with people on
the other side of the world.
(far, difficult)

3 Itis for modern
businesses to pay their
employees. (far, expensive)

4 Nowadays, doctors are
than they were in the past.
(much, educated)

B Write sentences about
a hundred years ago. Compare
them with your partner.

© TECHNOLOGY

2A Complete the words in
sentences 1-6.

1 | don't agree with

nu po . | think
it's a dangerous way of making
el

2 Sp tr is a waste

of money. Why do we need to
send people to the Moon?

| couldn't live without my

wa ma . | hate
dirty clothes.

4 |had to have loads of va
when | went to Malawi. | didn’t
want to get ill.

| think ge en is
a bit worrying. People might
start to only want babies
which are beautiful.

Doctors give people too many
an . So now, some
medicines don’t work any more.

w

uw

roy

B Work in pairs. Choose three
sentences you disagree with.
Tell your partner why.

© INFORMATION

3 A Put the letters in italics in
the correct order to find words
related to questions.
1 Inclass last week, we used
GES os
In class last week, we discussed ...
2 | can’t answer nose quits questions
about ...
| try to pen rods quickly to respond
4 |n the next few months I’m look into
going to took lion ... (2 words)
5 | recently quid rein about!nquired
6 | own red what happened to wonder
7 lenjoya good tea bed debate
especially about ...
8 It would be interesting to sit
negative a crime like ... investigate

w

B Complete the sentences so
that they are true for you.

© QUESTION TAGS

4A Complete the sentences with
the correct question tag.

1 She wrote the first Harry Potter
book in a café, didn’t she?

2 This man, who is U2's singer,
does a lot of humanitarian
work, doesn'the?

3. This actor has won an Oscar
for Forrest Gump, asnit he

4 He was probably the
greatest basketball player in
history, Wasn't he

5 She lived in Calcutta, where
she helped street children, put
she wasn't from India,“@S 8"

6 He became Cuba's leader in
1959 and he didn’t transfer
power to his brother until
2006, re,

7 Her full name is Madonna
Louise Ciccone, isn't it?

8 Her husband was US
President. She's very popular
but she probably won't be as
famous as him, Will she

B Who are these sentences
about?

1J K Rowling

C Work in groups. One student
thinks of a famous person. The
others ask tag questions to find
out who it is.

A: You're a man, aren’t you?

B: Yes.

@ POLITE REQUEST:

5 A Match requests 1-5 with

responses a)-e).
1bExcuse me, could you tell
me where | can find the
bathroom? eecnn
2cCould you call mea taxi? paséoiHuK
3e Would you mind helping me
with my bags? They’re very
heavy.
44Would you mind opening the
window?
5d Could you tell me what time
the restaurant opens?
“a Sure. It's very hot in here, isn’t
it?
Yes, of course. It’s just over
here, down the stairs and on
the left.
“AW Yes, of course. Where do you
want to go to?
d) I’m not sure. Let me have a
look. Yes, it opens at 11a.m.
e) Of course not. Let me take
your suitcase.
B Work in pairs. Take turns to
practise the conversations using
the prompts below.
Student A:
* where/bathroom?
* call/taxi?
* shop/close?
* get/door?
Student B
* open/window?
* restaurant/open?
* help/shopping?
+ tell/platform the train leaves
from?

--- PAGE 66 ---

INTERVIEWS

How are you
feeling today?

--- PAGE 67 ---

6.

FEELING STRESSED?

LA Look at photos A-F. What emotions do you think
these people are feeling? Why are they feeling
them?

B Read the text and match photos A-F with the
emotions.

C When was the last time you felt these emotions?
Give some examples.

— that wonderful feeling of happiness when
something brings a smile to your face. We all love and
recognise this one. It's a motivator too. We keep doing
things that make us feel happy.

—when something goes wrong and you
lose your temper. This emotion allows you to deal with
difficult situations, and not just run away.

— often experienced when we lose
someone or something important to us. If we see
someone whos feeling sad, we may start to feel sad
00.

—this is probably the most basic emotion.
We can experience this from a very early age, and it
elps us to escape from danger.

—when something unexpected
appens, you raise your eyebrows and actually open
your eyes wider to help you see what it is.

— this is an important emotion which
helped our ancestors to survive. If you eat something
disgusting or poisonous, your face warns others what
has happened.

(G) real conditionals
@ weak forms: pronouns + ’Il
© -ing/-ed adjectives; multi-word verbs

VOCABULARY

-ING/-ED ADJECTIVES

2 A Workin pairs and discuss the questions.
1 What makes you angry or annoyed?
2 What sorts of things do you find relaxing?
3 Is there anything you are frightened of?
4 What kinds of things make you worried?
5 Have you ever been really embarrassed?
6 What makes you feel exhausted?
7 What sorts of things do you find confusing?
8 Do you find your job/life satisfying?
B
1

Look at the quiz again and answer the questions.
Which ending is used to talk about feelings: -ed
or -ing?

2 Which ending is used to talk about the cause of
feelings: -ed or -ing?

C Complete the sentences with the correct form of

the adjectives in Exercise 2A. Remember to use -ed

or -ing endings.

1 It's very worrying watching the news at the
moment. | think there’s going to be another war.

2 I’m going to bed. I’m because I’ve been
working late every night this week.

3 My face went bright red when | realised what I'd
said. It was really

4 | love it when | see people enjoying the food I’ve
cooked. | find it very

5 | don’t understand the grammar. I’m completely

6 | go to yoga every week, because it makes me feel
so

[> page 153 VOCABULARYBANK

--- PAGE 68 ---

GRAMMAR

REAL CONDITIONALS

5 A Lookat four sentences from the programme. Which
talk about a general situation (GS) and which talk about a
specific/future situation (FS)?

a) When people get angry, they don’t know what to do with
their anger.

b) When we get there, I'll give you a hammer.

c) If | smash the car to pieces, will | feel better?

d) If people laugh about something, they feel better.

B Underline the correct alternative to complete the rules.

1 Use the zero (0) conditional (If/When + present simple
+ present simple) to talk about a general/specific
situation (fact), or something which is always true.

2 Use the first (1) conditional (/f/When + present simple
+ will/might/could) to talk about a general/specific
(possible) situation in the future. —_

LISTEN [> page 138 LANGUAGEBANK
6a

sa1nu

3 (GIT! Read the definition and listen to the 6.2 Listen and underline the words you hear.

radio programme. Answer the questions. 1 If he shouts, | get/I'll get angry.
2 Iflsee him, | tell/’'ll tell him.
therapy /'Gerapi/ n [C,U] plural therapies the 3 When they arrive, we eat/we'll eat.
treatment of a mental or physical illness over a 7
long period of time, especially without using 4 When we get there, we phone/we'll phone you.
drugs or operations: He’s having therapy to help 5 If! finish early, | go/I'll go home.
with alcohol addiction.

B WEAK FORMS: pronouns + ‘ll Listen again and
repeat. Pay attention to the weak form of ‘Il /al/ in the

1 Which two therapies does the programme contraction I'll /atal/ or we'll /wral/.
Straction the! ap)

From Longman Active Study Dictionary.

talk about? i
2. The therapies aughter therapie situations. 7A Complete the sentences with the correct form of the

Which situations are mentioned in the verbs in brackets. Mark each sentence zero (0) or first

programme? 1 when you are angry (1st) conditional.

2) if someone feels pain 1 a) If | go running every day, it (make) me feel
4 A Are the statements true (T) or false (F)? good.

1 Eight out of ten people have trouble b) I'm feeling down. If | go for a run, | (feel) better.

controlling their anger. F 2 a) When | finish reading this book, | (give) it to
2 With destruction therapy you use your anger you to read.

to destroy something in a controlled way. T b) When | (finish) reading a book, | usually feel
3 If you think about a situation when you were disappointed.

angry, the therapy will be more enjoyable. 3 a) I'm meeting my boss later. If | tell him about my new
4 |n Spain, some companies pay for their job, he (get) angry.

workers to build hotels. b) If | (get) angry, | take a deep breath and count
5 In Mexico, they use destruction therapy in to ten.

hospitals. 4 a) If I'm tired, | (like) to eat in front of the
6 Laughter therapy can help people to feel less television and go to bed early.

pain. b) I’m planning to drive through the night. If | get tired,
7 On average, children laugh 100 times a day, | (stop) and sleep.

and adults laugh seventeen times. B Complete the sentences so that they are true for you.
B Listen again to check. Correct the false Compare your ideas with a partner. Can you find any
statements. similarities?
C Discuss the questions. When | get older ...
1 Do you think destruction therapy and laughter When my English gets better, | ...

therapy are good ideas? Why?/Why not? If I'm happy, | usually ...
2 Would you try any of the ideas in the When | get home this evening ...

programme? If I'm stressed, | usually ...

--- PAGE 69 ---

8 A Workin pairs. What do you do in situations 1-7? Write three
pieces of advice to give to someone in one of these situations.

You're nervous about a job interview/exam.

You're annoyed with someone in your family.

It's the weekend and you're bored.

You're stressed about your work/studies.

You've got too many things to do.

You get home from English class and realise you've left your bag
behind.
7 When you get home, you're hungry but there’s nothing to eat.

Au RWN PR

B Work in groups and compare your ideas. Which is the best idea
for each situation?

If you've got too many things to do, you should try to prioritise your tasks.
If you get stressed about your work, try to do more exercise to help you
feel relaxed.

VOCABULARY
MULTI-WORD VERBS

9 A Match the following topics: Clothes, Computers and Love and

friendship with paragraphs 1-3.
pa3sroBopun MeHA

Lovefffjd friendship _- ] met my ex-boyfriend when he chatted me up

in a bar. We got on realleteh Sa teeR together for two years
and we were planning to settle down. Then I got bored and

went off him!

EX Computers -tt’s abit confusing. You have to scroll up and then
click on the arrow icon. If you want, you can log off before you
shut down.

hipumMepurt
: | love dressing up so when | tried on that purple
suit, | thought it was perfect for my first day at work. | was so cH
embarrassed when | arrived and the receptionist told me to take ot
my tie because everyone dresses down at the company!

B Match the multi-word verbs in bold in Exercise 9A with the
correct definition in the word webs. You will need to use the
infinitive form.

Put the computer mouse on a specific place and press _clickon _
Wear clothes to see if you want to buy them try on

Have a good relationship/like each other _get on

Stop liking someone/something __go off
off Remove (clothes) take off

Exit from a website log off

Talk to someone that you like so that they will like you
Wear especially smart or colourful clothes, e.g. for a party dress up

Move the computer mouse to see earlier pages_SCroll up

Switch off the computer Shut down

Wear clothes (to work) that are not smart, e.g. old jeans

aga g

chatt up

Choose to live a calm life, e.g. at home with a partner Settle down

dress down

10 A Look at the dictionary definitions

below and answer the questions.

1 Which verb needs an object?

2 Which verb does not need an
object?

3 Which verb can be followed by
another preposition?

tT] try sth on phr v to put on a piece of
clothing to find out if it fits or if you like
it: Can | try these jeans on, please?

Dp get on phr v1 Br Eif people get on, they
have a friendly relationship: + with She
doesn't get on with my mum very well.

rs) shut down phr v if a company, factory,
machine etc shuts down, or if you shut
it down, it stops operating: Hundreds
of local post offices have shut down. |
shut sth < down Did you shut the
computer down?

From Longman Active Study Dictionary.

B Use the dictionary definitions to

help you decide which sentences are

possible. Mark the sentences with a

tick or a cross.

1 | tried the suit on /| tried on the
suit.

2 | get on really well with Simon /
| get Simon on really well.

3 You need to shut down the
computer. / You need to shut the
computer down.

=>
speakout TIP

There are different ways to group
multi-word verbs (including phrasal verbs)
in your notebook. For example, you can
group them by topic (e.g. weather, travel,
work), or by preposition (e.g. multi-word
verbs with on, over, by). Decide how you
want to group them and then add the
phrases to your notebook.

C Choose three or four verbs from
above and write your own example
sentences. Use a dictionary to help.
Then compare them with a partner.
Are the sentences correct?

[> page 153 VOCABULARYBANK

--- PAGE 70 ---

THE PEOPLE WATCHERS

If you wanted to persuade someone
to dress up as a tree in public, what
would you do? If you wanted to raise
money for charity on the streets,
who would you ask to help you?
What would you do if you wanted

to sell cakes and nobody was buying
them? What would you do if you
needed to think creatively but didn’t
have any ideas?

One thing you could do is watch a
programme from the BBC series

The People Watchers. The programme
asks the question ‘Why do we do what
we do?’ Through twenty episodes, Professor
Richard Wiseman, two psychologists and
a neuroscientist do experiments
involving members of the public, secretly
filming them with a hidden camera. The
experiments show why we behave the
way we do in everyday situations. If you

CG] hypothetical conditional present/future
@ connected speech: would

@ verb-noun collocations

wanted to know how to get a seat on a
crowded train, stop people from jumping
queues, get someone to do you a favour,
work out if someone is lying, and get a
complete stranger to lend you a mobile
phone, you could find out by watching.

In one experiment, two of Wiseman’s
psychologists pretended to be cake-sellers.
They stood at a stall on the street and
tried to sell cakes for a pound each. No
one bought any. So they did what shops
do: they held a sale. But it wasn’t a real
sale. They pretended that one cake cost
two pounds, and if you bought a cake,
you would get another one free. People
started buying! Later they told people
that the cakes usually cost two pounds
but they were doing a special deal and
selling them for just one pound. Again,
people bought the cakes. It seems that
everyone loves the idea of a bargain even
if they aren’t really getting one.

Another experiment looked at
‘experts’ who aren’t. Emma, a psychologist,
pretended to be a hairdresser. While
‘cutting’ three people’s hair, she talked like
a hairdresser, saying all the right things,
and dropped a few bits of fake hair. The
three volunteers later said they were very
happy with their haircuts. In reality, Emma
hadn’t cut any hair. Richard Wiseman’s
conclusion? People would do better if they
didn’t always listen to ‘experts’. Instead,
they should trust their own eyes.

In another experiment, Jack, a
psychologist, had to persuade ordinary
people to dress up as a tree. The trick was
to ‘start small’. First, Jack asked a man
to wear a badge; then he asked him to
wear a cap; and finally the tree suit.

This, Wiseman says, is called ‘The foot
in the door technique’: if you want a big
favour from someone, first ask for a
small favour!

1 A Read the first paragraph of the article. How
would you answer the four questions in that
paragraph? Discuss with other students.

VOCABULARY |

VERB-NOUN COLLOCATIONS

3 A Match verbs 1-7 with nouns a)-g).
1 hold a) money (for something)

B Now read the rest of the article to find out what 2 raise b) experiments
researchers did to answer the questions.
3 do c) a programme

2 A Work in pairs and answer the questions. 4 get t d) hair

1 What question does the programme try to answer? ; jump 0 a queue

2 How did Wiseman’s team carry out their research? . ee h ya ae

3 What was the ‘trick’ to get people to buy cakes? wets &) asale

4 What ‘trick’ did Emma, the fake hairdresser, use? B Which do you do:

5 What is ‘the foot in the door technique’?

B Read the article again. Make notes under these
headings.

1 People involved in the programme

2 Situations

3 Conclusions from the experiments

C Think of a question about human behaviour that

you would like answered. What could researchers in
this programme do to answer it?

Ne

Nou FW

0 sell something cheaply?

0 avoid standing up in a train/bus/waiting

room, etc.?

o help a charity?

o be informed or entertained?

o make someone look more beautiful?

0 obtain new scientific information?

0 avoid waiting in a long line (e.g. to get tickets)?

--- PAGE 71 ---

GRAMMAR 6 Complete the sentences with the

HYPOTHETICAL CONDITIONAL: PRESENT/FUTURE corrent fori of the venie Ia the He,
. . write do can fail not/rain
4 . Rene a review of an People Watchers. Why does the reviewer see (x2) go like ji
ike the programme? not/be tell
© 1 | would _ write _ my autobiography
> Pick of the month rr leliecidimienecd cine: oardeh vi
My own favourite series this month? The People Watchers. Presented by 2 What if you a UFO?
Professor Richard Wiseman and his rather attractive psychologist friends, 3 If — herein 4 h
the show asks some very interesting questions. If no one saw you, would you_ —_—..B0:any WIS m the
take something without paying for it? How close to someone would you stand world, !____ to the Caribbean.
if you didn’t know them? It’s all good stuff, but maybe the programme could 4 Ifit so much, | to
i Unfortunately, for most of the ive in Norway.
series, we only hear Professor Wiseman’s voice. And it would also be nice 5 You very happy if you
if we had more statistics. Some of the experiments using hidden cameras the exam.
show only one or two people in action which is not enough to make big . wee
: oe - 6 If you a friend shoplifting,
conclusions about human nature. But overall, this is good TV: light, easy !
would you the police.

on the eye, and fun.

7A Complete the sentences about

your classmates.

1 If could go anywhere, he/
she...

2 If wasn’t so busy, he/she ...

3 If was able to speak to
his/her President, he/she ...

4 if knew how to, he/she ...

5 would feel very happy if ...

6 ‘s life would be easier if ...

7 wouldn't like it if ...

8 wouldn't care if ...

B Ask your classmates if your
sentences are true.

B Look at the four underlined sentences above and complete the
rules with the words in the box.

would could hypothetical past

| 1We use the hypothetical conditional to describe a

= situation. 8 A What would you do if...

| 2\nthe ifclause,weusethe___simple. 1 someone asked you to dress up as a
3 In the result clause, we use or ‘d. tree for charity?
4 lf we are not sure of the result, we can also use : 2 a stranger asked to borrow your

mobile phone?

C Find other examples of the hypothetical conditional in the
article on page 71.

[> page 138 LANGUAGEBANK

5A Db) CONNECTED SPEECH: would Listen and complete the
conversations.
1 A: What if your laptop exploded?

B: If my laptop exploded, I'd call for help!
2 A: What would you do if you lost your house keys?

B: If | lost my house keys, climb through the window!
3 A: How would you feel if your car broke down?
B: If my car broke down, | happy!

B Listen again and answer questions 1-3.

1 How do we pronounce would in the question form?

2 How do we pronounce would in fast spoken English in positive
sentences?

3 How do we pronounce the negative of would?

3 someone jumped a queue, ahead
of you?

4 you had to think of a way to raise
money for charity in the street?

5 someone asked you to take part in
a TV programme?

6 you heard someone saying bad
things about your friend?

7 you saw someone stealing bread in
the supermarket?

8 you found a bag of money in the
street?

I'd take the bag of money to the police.

B Choose five or six of the situations.

Work in groups and tell other

students what you would do.

--- PAGE 72 ---

WRITING

AN EMAIL OF ADVICE; LEARN TO QUALIFY
WHAT YOU SAY

9 Look at the photo and discuss. What do you do when you need
advice? Do you look for help online or perhaps ask a relative/
friend/experienced older person? What does it depend on?

10 A Read the dilemma. What do you think the person should do?

My cousin has asked me to lend her some money to start an
internet business. She is intelligent and reliable, and [like her,
but she is only twenty years old. Also, I know nothing about
internet businesses. Should I lend her the money?

B Read the responses. Which do you agree with? Why?

You have the money.

She has the ideas, the
energy and the expertise.
If I were you, I wouldn’t
worry about her age.

As a young person, she
might know more about
the internet than you do.
And she isn’t asking for
your advice, only your
money. So, come on -
you’re a member of her
family. What do you have
to lose apart from a bit
of money? And if you’re
really worried, maybe tell
her you want fifty percent
of the money back
within two years. If she’s
reliable, you’ll probably
get it.

So your cousin wants money.
Perhaps you really trust her,
but aged twenty, she probably
doesn’t have much experience
in business. If I were you, I’d
ask a lot of questions first. I’d
find out how much research
she has done, how well she
knows the market, and who
else is involved. It’s possible
that she will be successful, but
over ninety percent of new
companies disappear within
the first year. The other thing
is time. It might take her a few
years to start making a profit.
Can you wait that long to get
your money back? And think
about this: if it wasn’t your
cousin asking, would you lend
the money?

C Tick the things an email of advice might include. Compare your

ideas with other students.

11 A Look at the words/phrases in the

1 ashort summary of the situation

a few sentences describing your qualifications

some ideas about what the person should do

some background information explaining your ideas
a question for the reader to think about

uk WN

D Find the things you ticked in the responses in Exercise 10B.

box. Find and underline these in the
emails in Exercise 10B. Then answer
the questions.

maybe probably perhaps might
It’s possible that

1 Which words/phrases mean ‘there is
a strong possibility’?

2 Which two words have the same
meaning?

B How do you feel about statements

1-4? Qualify them, using the words

and phrases above.

1 As life in the twenty-first century
gets more complex, people will

have more complex problems.

2 Inthe future, machines will ‘read’

our emotions and ‘know’ if we have

a problem.

3 In the future, most young people

will prefer to talk to strangers online

about their problems rather than

have face-to-face conversations with

family and friends.

4 I'd never write to a problem page if |
needed advice.

Most people ask their family and friends

for advice. They don’t need to write to

problem pages.

Most people probably ask their family

and friends for advice. Maybe they don’t

need to write to problem pages.

12 A Read the problem below. Work

with other students and think of
possible solutions.

Ihave a problem. My twenty-six-year-
old brother has always loved football,
but now it’s becoming an obsession. He
goes to watch matches every weekend
even though the tickets are expensive
and he doesn’t have much money. At
his house, he sometimes watches three
or four matches on TV a day! His only
friends are football fans, and his last
girlfriend broke up with him because
of his obsession. I want to help him,
but he’s older than me and he thinks
it’s none of my business what he does
in his free time. Please can you give me
some advice?

B write an email of advice to the
writer above.

C Work in groups and take turns to
read what you wrote. If you were in
the person’s situation, which letter
would you like to receive?

--- PAGE 73 ---

6.3 )) THAT’S GREAT NEWS! @ sing news

(P) intonation: giving bad news

@ life events

VOCABULARY

LIFE EVENTS

LA Look at phrases 1-8. Are they good
news (G) or bad news (B)?

Pass/fail your exams

Be offered a job

Get a place at university/a degree

Get engaged/married

Lose your job/money

Split up with a partner

Get promoted

8 Buy a house

NOU RWN PR

B Work in pairs. Have any of the
things above happened recently to
you, or anyone you know?

FUNCTION

2 A Workin groups and discuss. What

is the best way to give bad news? GIVING NEWS
<temtleapiers aietlelerwith ‘thre 3 A (») 6.4 Listen to seven conversations. Match the conversations
Phrases In the Dox. to the pictures A-G.
give areason tone of voice B Look at the pictures again. What is the good news or bad news
prepare your listener bad news in each situation?

making people too upset good news

4 A Look at the phrases the speakers use to introduce their news.
Listen again and write the conversation number next to each phrase.

Good ways to give bad news

good news I've got some good news (for you).
It's easy to give someone good news, but, I'm really pleased to tell you ...
eon when you have some = = You'll never guess what.
tell? Ar F ive ba
news re HORA Despre Hepa a steps bad news Bad news, I'm afraid.
might help: I'm sorry to have to tell you, but ...

; iit I'm afraid/Unfortunately, ...
Say something positive: Teytasiet areata hine I'm afraid I've got some bad news ...

conversation with some W483 that it’s There’s something I’ t to tell
not all bad. For example, ‘You did very well in the Eres SOMethINg IE ZOLLO Lelyou.

interview, but unfortunately we've given the job good or bad news _| You know... ? Well, ...
Hpssare. oy iiStener. \'ve/We've got something to tell you. 1
4

for the news: Use phrases to . - .
introduce what you're going to say, like » Listen to some of the phrases in the table again.

‘Unfortunately, ..., ‘I'm really sorry, but ... or ‘I'm Underline the stressed syllables.
afraid I've got some bad news. This gives the

C INTONATION: giving bad news Listen again. Is the speaker’s voice

ist ti te f hat i i
_ a TOLD RET ENSURE LIAS STE high or low for good news? Is it high or low for bad news? Practise
give a reason the phrases.
Try to ® : People like to know why
hings go wrong. Try to explain the decision: if [> page 138 LANGUAGEBANK
someone doesn't get the job, can you explain
why? If you have to cancel an arrangement, try 5 Put the words in the correct order to make sentences.
0 ove “tone of Voice 1 news / afraid / I’m / bad / the / we / match / lost
Use a soft ‘If youre giving someone 2 to/I'm/the/you/ tell / got / pleased / you / really / job / that
bad news, try to use a soft, calm voice to - f | ji b fraid
make you sound kind. Say things to show you 3 going /I'm/to/ late / we're / be / afrai
understand, like, ‘I’m really sorry: or ‘l know this 4 got / you / there's / tell / I've / to / something
must be disappointing: 5 never / what / you'll / guess
6 got / news / I've / for / good / you / some
C Read the article again. Do you 7 was / concert / the / unfortunately, / cancelled
agree with the advice? Why?/Why not? 8 lost? / you / the / we / cat / know / we / again / found / him / well,

--- PAGE 74 ---

LEARN

RESPOND TO NEWS

6 How do the speakers respond to the news? Complete
the conversations with the words in the box.

7 ADE

joking sorry lucky annoying pleased
Congratulations done shame _ terrible

1 A: I've been offered a job.
; Wow! That's fantastic. !
: We've offered the job to someone else.
; Oh. That's a . Thanks, anyway.
: I've just won some money in a creative writing
competition.
You're ?.... How much did you win?
: Two thousand euros.
You thing!
; We crashed the car.
; Oh no. That's ;
: They've offered me a place.
; That's wonderful news. Well !I'm so
for you.
6 A: Steve's lost his job.
B: Oh no. That's awful. I’m really to hear
that.
7 A: And they've got engaged.
B: No! That's really .

rworwo

i
Droarwaryw

=
speakout TIP

Exaggerate! Sometimes when you speak in a foreign
language, your intonation can sound flat. This can mean
that you don’t sound as polite or enthusiastic as you want
to. Try to exaggerate the intonation pattern to sound
enthusiastic or concerned. Say the responses in Exercise
7A with an exaggerated intonation.

6 Listen to responses 1-4. Notice the
intonation patterns.

1 Congratulations! 3 That's ashame.

2 That's fantastic news! 4 That's awful.

B Practise saying the phrases with the correct
intonation.

cb) Mark the main stress on sentences 1-6.
Which ones use a higher voice? Listen and check,
then listen and repeat.

You lucky thing!

That's terrible.

Well done.

I'm so pleased for you.

That’s really annoying.

That's awful. I’m really sorry to hear that.

8 A Workin pairs and role-play the situation. Student

A: you have just won some money in a lottery.
Student B: listen and respond to Student A’s news.

Student A

Tell Student B you

have some good Student B
news.

Ask Student A what the

/ news is.

Tell Student B that
you won some money
in the lottery.

Respond to the news
and ask Student A how
Z| much they won.

Tell Student B how
much money you won.

Tell Student A how lucky

you think they are. Ask
4 Student A what they
plan to do with the
money.

Tell Student B you
are going to use the
money to help send

your brother and

his young family on
holiday as they have
had a difficult year.

Respond to the news.

B Work in pairs. First, think of three pieces of
good/bad news to tell your partner. Then take turns
to give and respond to each other’s news using
expressions in Exercises 4 and 6.

--- PAGE 75 ---

6.4 ©)) MY WORST WEEK

DVD PREVIEW

1 A Discuss. How do you think people usually feel

DVD VIEW

2 A Watch the DVD. What is the problem?

the week before their wedding? What kind of
things can go wrong when you are preparing for
a wedding?

B Read about a BBC comedy. Why is this week
supposed to be special for Howard? What’s the
problem?

My Worst Week [agai

The week before a wedding can be a difficult
time, but for publisher Howard Steele, marrying
the beautiful Mel, it becomes a complete
nightmare. Everything that can possibly go
wrong does go wrong, even though Howard
tries desperately to do the right thing. During
the week, Howard accidentally kills his in-laws’
dog, puts Mel’s granny in hospital, and loses
the wedding ring (which has been in the family
for many generations) twice. It’s not a good
start, and what should have been a very special
week soon turns into the worst week of his life.

B Number the events in the correct order.

a) Mel calls Howard in his office.

b) Eve takes the ring off using soap in the bathroom.

c) Howard arrives in his office and shows his
secretary, Eve, the ring. 1

d) Howard’s work colleagues organise a surprise
party for him.

e) The ring gets stuck.

f) Eve bursts into tears, so Howard lets her try the
ring on.

3 A what do they say? Complete the phrases using

the words in the box.

wedding happiness 3mm_ a hundred and fifty
plumber secretary luck

1 Howard: ‘It’s been in Mel's family for years.
They have this rather charming tradition where
they (uh) pass it down from generation to
generation.’

2 Eve: ‘l always wanted a fairy-tale of my
own.

3 Eve: ‘l can’t do that. It’s bad :

4 Howard: ‘I picked it up on my way in. They’ve
reduced it by '

5 Howard: ‘When the vicar asks me to put the ring
on my fiancée’s finger, it would be very nice if my
____ was not attached.’

6 Boss: ‘We'd like to wish you and Mel every
and hope you have a great day on Saturday’

7 Eve: ‘I'll get a ,

B Watch the DVD again to check.

4A Complete the sentences about how the

characters felt.

Eve is impressed when she sees ...
Eve gets upset about ...

Howard is annoyed when ...

Eve is anxious about ...

Howard is surprised when ...
Howard is shocked when ...

Au RWN Pe

B Compare your ideas with another student.

--- PAGE 76 ---

BES 6.4

speakout memorable moments writeback a website entry

5 A 1)68 Listen toa man talking about a special 6 A Read the website entry. What kind of things

=

weekend. Which of the following statements is not

true?

1 His brother organised a surprise weekend away.

2 They went on a boat trip to a lighthouse, and slept
there.

3 They went shopping with his brother’s money.

4 They went to the theatre and then ate an
expensive five-course meal.

B Listen again and tick the key phrases you hear.

PHRASES
One of the most memorable moments/events in
my life was ...
The happiest moment of my life was when ...
It all started one day when ...
| was so [embarrased/delighted/shocked/terrified]
when ...
| had absolutely no idea.
The funniest thing that ever happened to me was ...
The next thing/morning ...
That weekend/day is one of my happiest memories.

C Choose one of the following questions. Plan your

answer using some of the key phrases.

1 What are the strongest memories of your
childhood?

2 Have you ever done anything you regret?

3 What's the most embarrassing/funniest/scariest
thing that has ever happened to you?

4 What do you remember about the house you lived
in as a child?

5 Can you remember a time when you felt very
proud?

6 What is your happiest memory?

D Work in groups and tell your stories.

do people write about on this website? What was
special about Jess's trip?

100 lives

real life, real people, real experiences

Join people from around the world who want to share their
stories and experiences. Read true personal stories, chat and
get advice from the group.

Q: What’s your happiest memory?

One of my happiest memories is of a trip I did to
America when I'd just left school. My father told
me that everyone should see New York once in their
lifetime and he helped me to save enough money to
buy my plane ticket. I spent three weeks travelling
around the US on my own. I visited New York and
Washington and travelled through the countryside
on a bus. I met so many wonderful people on that
rip, and saw some amazing sights. I remember I
had this great sense of freedom, like I was at the
beginning of the whole adventure of my adult life.
Everything was in front of me and I would be able
o do whatever I chose to do. When I think back to
hose days, it always brings a smile to my face.

Jess, UK

B Choose another question from Exercise 5C and
write your story (150-200 words). Use the website
entry above and the key phrases to help.

f
{
no

lp

--- PAGE 77 ---

6.5 (( LOOKBACK

G A Each conversation has two

3 Work in pairs and take turns.
Student A: write down three
things you would like to achieve

NG/-ED
ADJECTIVES !

LA Workin pairs. Use adjectives

to describe how you feel in the

following situations.

1 You lose your bus/train ticket.

2 You get lost at night ina
foreign city.

3 You wait for a delayed flight.

4 You forget someone's name
(when you should know it).

B Write situations for the

adjectives in the box.

annoying worried boring
embarrassing relaxing
confusing exhausted
frightening satisfied

annoying: When you discover your
phone has run out of power, it’s ...
worried: My exams are tomorrow.
I'm really...

C Work in pairs. Take turns to
read your situations. Don’t say
the adjectives they describe.
Can your partner guess the
adjective?

© REAL
CONDITIONALS

2 A Match 1-7 with a)-g) to make

sentences.

1 If you drink too much coffee,

2 If you go to bed early,

3 If you always go to bed late,

4 If you listen to loud music

when you study,

You won't get fit if you

6 If you don't like your job,

7 You'll have problems at work if
you

uw

a) drive everywhere in your car.

b) you won't sleep tonight.

c) it’s difficult to concentrate.

d) you'll exhaust yourself.

e) don't finish that report on
time.

f) you'll feel better in the
morning.

g) look for a new one.

B Look at the sentences in

Exercise 2A. Can you think of

other ways to complete them?

Compare your ideas with a

partner.

this year. Student B: look at

Student A’s list and make

if/when sentences to give advice.

A: one: find a new job, two: get fit,
three: improve my English

B: one: find a new job: If you look
on the internet, you might find
anew job.

© VERB-NOUN
COLLOCATIONS
4 Rearrange the letters in bold
to complete the sentences with

collocations of watch/hold/raise/
do/get/cut.

1 We should go to the concert
early so we can est gates.
get seats

2 They are going to heal loads
to sell their old clothes.

3 The schoolchildren decided
to ease my iron for cancer
research.

4 I'm going home early because
| want to grammar two peach
on TV.

5 He gave up his job because he
didn’t want to opened term
six on animals.

6 My cousin i shut car for a living.

© HYPOTHETICAL
CONDITIONAL
5 Work in pairs. Student A: use
an if clause with the phrases in
your box. Student B: respond

with the correct would clause
from your box.

A

t#be/rich ~~ there/be/no war
there/be/more hours in the day
\/have/more/energy
nobody/smoke  can/paint/well
\/give up/coffee

B
dance/all night sleep/better
people/be/healthier
do/a portrait of you

people/work/more
the world/be/peaceful

A: If |was rich ...
B: I'd give some money to charity.

words missing. Write in the
missing words. You may have to
change the punctuation.

I'm
: Bad news(fraid.

B: What's the matter?

=
>

>

: The computers aren't
working.

Not again! Annoying.
You'll never what.
What?

| got the job.

SDF DF

Congratulations! That's

news.
I've got some good news you.
What is it?

I've been promoted.

Well. That's great news.

te ks ee te

I'm to have to tell you, but

I'm leaving the company.

What? Why?

A: The company has got
problems, so they're
reducing the number of
managers.

B: I’m sorry to that.

5 A: You that exam | did last
week?

B: Yes?

A: Well, | passed.

B: Congratulations! I’m so

for you.

B Work in pairs and practise
the conversations.

--- PAGE 78 ---

SSO55DNS

a

/-

SPEAKING 71 Talk about success 7.2 Talk about your abilities 7.3 Give/Clarify opinions B | |B |
7.4 Describe an achievement

LISTENING 7.1 Understand a radio programme about success 7.2 Listen to a conversation INTERVIEWS
about memory 7.3 Listen toa discussion about intelligence 7.4 Watch a BBC o) What has been your
documentary about Andy Murray greatest achievement

to date?
READING 7.2 Read a biographical text 7.3 Read about three job candidates Or

WRITING 7.2 Write asummary 7.4 Write an internet post 2

--- PAGE 79 ---

THE SECRET OF SUCCESS — Qritnteasm

@ weak forms: have
(v) success; verb phrases

Write the names of three very successful people. Answer Read the introduction to an article
the questions. about success. What do you think the
1 How and why did these people become successful? secret of success is?

2 Do you think they have a special talent, or have they just
been lucky? What is the secret

3 What advice would you give to someone who wants to be as of success?
successful as these people?

Work in pairs and read the quotes. What do they tell you < BBi hosts Mapaziiie: VESHEAES

about success? Do you agree or disagree?
you ag g What makes the most successful people

- on the planet different from the rest of
‘Thave not failed. I've just found 10.000 ways us? If we were more like Albert Einstein or
that won't work.’ : John Lennon, surely we could enjoy the
LL sabes same level of success.
In his new book,
‘Success doesn’t come to you ... you go to it.’ Malcolm Gladwell
reveals that there
is one factor - so

a obvious that it’s right
‘The secret of success in life is for a man to be Under our noses —

ready for his opportunity when it comes.’ that all successful
Benjamin Disraeli people share ...

Marva Collins

Can you recognise any of the people in the photos? Do you
know why they are famous?

--- PAGE 80 ---

Listen to the radio programme and

complete the summary.

In this new book, Outliers, Gladwell argues that
Beethoven, The Beatles etaree Gates all have one
thing inommon what they do, and
they practised a lot. In fact, Glad dwell discovered
that in order to be truly ywora-class anything it ni.
necessary to practise for more than* thousand
These people have done that which is why he

believes they have been so >

ry

Are the statements true (T) or false (F)?

If we want to learn from Bill Gates’ achievements,
we need to look at where he came from and the
opportunities he had.  F

If you're going to be world-class at something, you
need to have parents who are high achievers. F
The Beatles played all-night concerts in Hamburg,
and this helped them to master their craft. T

To become a successful tennis player, you need a
very talented teacher, and enough money to pay
for your tuition. F

Listen again to check.

Discuss. Do you agree that if you practise

something enough, you can become world-class at
it, or do you think you need to have a natural talent
for it?

SUCCESS

Complete sentences 1-8 with the phrases in

the box.

workhardtatsemething) bea high achiever

focus-on

havethe-oppertinitytte-de-semethine+
believe in-yeurself master (a skill / a craft)
(be werld-class-fat something)

1

4

You will never achieve anything, if you don’t
work hard,
radiave a natoraftakene for

| don’t anguages. | find them

difficult to learn
elieve in yourself
If you

can achieve anything.
It's amazing what children can achieve if they

nd your abilities, then you

have the opportunity to try different skills.

5

If you want to__ master
practise it regularly.

I'm sure she wil?® @ high achiveghe | is determined
to do well at everything.

When | really want something, | try to_ focus on
my goal.

She'll beat all the women in the world this year.
She’s a_world-class__ gymnast.

any skill, you have to

Find phrases above to match meanings 1-6.
be sure about your ideas/abilities

only think about one objective

become very skilled at something

have the chance to do something

be ambitious and successful in your work or
studies

to be one of the best in the world

Choose two of the phrases and make sentences

which are true for you. Compare your ideas with a
partner.

page 154 BANK

Discuss the questions in groups.

1

Do you have a special skill/interest? How many
hours do you think you have spent practising it?
(10,000 hours is approximately ten hours per week
for twenty years.)

What things have you been successful at?

What factors do you think contributed to

that success?

Are there any particular skills you wish you had?
Do you think you could be successful at that skill
if you worked hard at it?

--- PAGE 81 ---

GRAMMAR VOCABULARY (EUS

PRESENT PERFECT SIMPLE VERSUS CONTINUOUS VERB PHRASES

G A Read sentences a)-e). Underline examples of the present perfect 9 A Choose the correct preposition

simple and circle examples of the present perfect continuous.
a) Martina’s been playing tennis since she was three years old.
b) Anya’s been going to ballet lessons since she was a child.

c) I’ve known Max for years.

d) How long have you been studying French?

e) He’s always enjoyed playing sport.

B Match sentences a)-e) with rules 1-3. Some sentences will
match more than one rule.

1 Use the present perfect continuous to emphasise that an
action has been long and repeated.

2 With state verbs (e.g. like, love, understand, remember,
know, etc.), we cannot use the present perfect continuous, so
we use the present perfect simple.

3 We often use for, since and How long have you ...? with the
present perfect simple and the present perfect continuous.
We chose the present perfect continuous where possible,
unless the main verb is a state verb.

sand

[> page 140 LANGUAGEBANK

7A Complete the sentences with the present perfect simple
or continuous form of the verbs in brackets and any other
information you need.

1 | (study) German for ... years, but | still find the
grammar difficult!

2 | (learn) Arabic for two years.

3) (live) on my own since! ....

41 always (love) art, but I’m not very
good at it.

5 | (have) my own car since | was ....

6 | always (want) to ... .Maybe I'll learn
one day.

B (D)7.2 Weak FORMS: have Listen to the sentences. Notice
the pronunciation of have. Is it strong or weak? Practise saying
the sentences.

C Change some of the sentences in Exercise 7A so they are true
for you. Compare your ideas with a partner.

8 A Make questions with the prompts.

1 how long / you / know / best friend?

2 how long / you / do / your hobby?

3 how long / you / have / that ... (watch / phone / jacket)?
4 how long / you / live in this town / city?

5 how/you / spend / your days off recently?

B Work in pairs. Take turns to ask and answer the questions above.
Think of two or more follow-up questions for each question.
A: How long have you known your best friend?

B: For about fifteen years.

A: Where did you meet?

to complete the verb phrases in

sentences 1-7.

1 | don't have a lot in common to/
with/for my sister.

2 We don't have access with/at/to the
internet at work.

3 She's world-class in/for/at playing
the violin.

4 He works very hard. He puts in/to/
with a lot of hours.

5 I've got a lot to think with/for/about
at the moment.

6 The film picks up on/to/at the
difficulties people experienced
during the war.

7 She has a talent about/for/in finding
a bargain.

B Add the verb phrases from Exercise
9A to the correct group below.

1 agree 5 depend
argue with rely on
2 worry 6 look
complain ; about laugh at
3 belong 7 succeed
pay attention } to believe Fin
4 pay
wait for
_
speakout TIP

There are many verbs in English which
use prepositions. Keep a record of which
prepositions go with which verbs in your
notebook. Can you add any more phrases
to the diagram in Exercise 9B?

C write three questions to ask a
partner about their life, using the
verb phrases above.

Would you think about learning a new
skill?

Is there anyone you tend to rely on?
What kinds of things do you generally
succeed in?

D Work in pairs. Ask and answer your
questions.

[> page 154 VOCABULARYBANK

--- PAGE 82 ---

THE MEMORY MEN © present and past ability

@ word stress

(v) ability

VOCABULARY

ABILITY

4 A Workin pairs. You are going to read about two men,
nicknamed ‘The human computer’ and ‘The human camera’.

L Make alist of five Hiatt es a What special abilities do you think they have?

and three that you are bad at. Show the
list to a partner. He/She asks questions to B Student A: read the text below to see if your ideas are
find out what you are good/bad at. mentioned. Student B: turn to page 161.

How long have you been playing the
drums? How often do you play? Do you ...

2 ; THE HUMAN COMPUTER
A Read sentences a)-h), then discuss

questions 1-3 with a partner. Daniel Tammet says he was born on a blue day, 31st January 1979.
He knows it was blue because Wednesdays are always blue, like the

a) He's an expert in Italian art. number nine or the sound of people arguing.

He's written several books about it.

As a child, Daniel was diagnosed as autistic. He couldn’t make Friends.
b) He's gifted at painting. He had his first 5

He was too different from the other children. Aged eight, he was able to

exhibition when he was sixteen. calculate 82 x 82 x 82 x 82 in his head, but he couldn't tie his own shoe
c) She has a lot of ability as a dancer. laces, or ride a bicycle.

| think she could become a professional. The thing that makes Daniel special is that he has an incredible ability
d) She's the most skilful footballer I’ve with numbers. He imagines them as shapes and colours (‘289 is an ugly

ever seen. She can play in any position. number’, he says) and is able to do extremely difficult mathematical
e) He has an aptitude for maths. calculations. On the TV programme that made him famous in the UK,

he managed to recite 22,514 numbers from pi perfectly. IF you tell
Daniel your birth date, he can tell you what day of the week you were
born on, and what day of the week it will be on your 65th birthday.

Daniel counts everything. He eats exactly forty-five grams of porridge

He learns new formulas very quickly.
f) He is a really talented musician.
He can play six instruments.

g) I'm hopeless at geography. | failed for breakfast each morning and he brushes his teeth for exactly two
my exam three times. minutes. He doesn’t like walking on the beach near his home because
h) I’m useless at ball sports. | can’t there are too many pebbles to count.
play any. Daniel's other great love, besides numbers (which he calls ‘his friends’),
1. Which of the words in bold are negative? is learning languages. He speaks ten, and he managed to learn Icelandic

in a week for a TV programme in Iceland. He is now a bestselling
author, his books including Born on a Blue Day, 8 the Wide a

2 Which are nouns and which are
adjectives?

3 What do you think the words mean?
Use the context of the sentences to
help you.

WORD STRESS Look at

the words in bold in exercise 2A.

Then listen to the sentences and

answer the questions.

1 Which parts of the words in bold are
stressed? Underline the stressed part.

2 Which five words have two syllables?
Where do we normally put the stress
on two-syllable words?

C Listen again and repeat the
sentences. Focus on the stressed parts.

3 A write the name of:
* an expert in your own area of interest.
* someone in the class who is talented.
* a gifted musician.
* something you are useless at.
* something you have an aptitude for.

C Student A: read the text above again and answer the questions.
How was his behaviour different from other children?

What special talents does he have?

How did the public learn about his special talents?

What country/countries has he been to and what did he do there?
What does he do now?

What has he published?

D Tell your partner about your text. Use questions 1-6 to help.

B Work in groups. Ask each other to
explain what they wrote and why.

au RWN

--- PAGE 83 ---

GRAMMAR

PRESENT AND PAST ABILITY

5 Read sentences a)-i) and answer questions 1-3.

1 Which sentences describe present ability and
which describe past ability?

2 Which words are used to express past and present
ability? Underline them.

3 Which three sentences are negative?

a) If you tell Daniel your birth date, he can tell
you what day of the week you were born on.
present ability

b) He could see a building just once and remember
everything about it.

c) Asa child, he couldn’t make friends.

d) He is able to do extremely difficult calculations.

e) He was able to calculate 82 x 82 x 82 x 82.

f) He wasn’t able to sit still.

g) He always manages to draw everything in the
right place.

h) He managed to learn Icelandic in a week.

i) He didn’t manage to pass his exams.

[> page 140 LANGUAGEBANK

6 A Read the text below quickly. What does Derek
have in common with Daniel Tammet and Stephen
Wiltshire?

B Complete the text with the words in the box.

can isn’t can’t managed could to
couldn’t able

When four-year-old Derek Paravacini heard the
sound of the piano, he ran towards it. Although
he was blind, he ! to reach the instrument.
He pushed the piano player — a small girl - off
her stool, and started to play. Adam Ockleford,

a piano teacher, said, ‘It was ... extraordinary.
He was hitting the notes with his hands, his feet,
his nose, even his elbows.’ Paravacini was ”
to play the tune he had just heard and at that
moment Ockleford realised the boy was a genius.

Paravacini was born blind and autistic and had
great learning difficulties. As a child, he *
do many things that ordinary children do.
Even today, as an adult, he * count to

ten, and he > able to dress or feed himself.
But Paravacini has one incredible gift: music.
Like Mozart, he ° remember every piece
of music he hears.

It started when his parents gave him a plastic
organ when he was eighteen months old.

He couldn't see the notes, but he managed

2 play tunes on it. By the time he was
four, he ® play many pieces on the piano.
With Ockleford’s help, Paravacini developed
his technique and played his first major concert
at the Barbican Hall in London, aged nine.

He has performed all over Europe and the US
and in 2006 recorded his first CD.

? A Lookat the activities in the pictures and read
the instructions below.
1 Put one tick next to the things you can do now.
2 Put two ticks next to the things you could do
when you were a child.
3 Put three ticks next to the activities you are very
good at.

B Work in groups. Compare your abilities. Say how
often you do these things and which of them you
enjoy. Describe any special memories you have of
any of these activities.

1066 686 0°,

1901 /837

REMEMBER
IMPORTANT:
OM

--- PAGE 84 ---

WRITING

A SUMMARY; LEARN TO MAKE
NOTES FOR A SUMMARY

8 A When do we summarise

information? Have you ever written a

summary? Why might it be useful to
make notes first?

B Read the summary and answer
questions 1-3.

Daniel Tammet and Stephen
Wiltshire are two gifted young
Englishmen who suffer from
forms of autism. These men have
one thing in common — they are
able to remember large amounts
of information — but their talents
are very different. Wiltshire has an
ability to draw complicated images
after seeing them only once, while
Tammet has an amazing aptitude
for remembering numbers. They
have both appeared on television
programmes, which helped make
them famous, and both published
books. While Tammet and
Wiltshire experienced difficulties
during their childhood, their great
achievements are now recognised
by the public. And best of all: they
both seem happy with their lives.

Does the summary explain the
main idea of the text(s) (who, what,
where and why)?

Is the summary shorter or longer
than the original text(s)?

Does the writer of the summary
copy sentences from the original
text(s) or does he/she use his/her
own words?

C Work in pairs. Look at phrases

1

-5 from the summary. What details

do these phrases leave out? What
information is missing?

1

Wiltshire has an ability to draw
complicated images.

He drew a train station in London and
pictures of other cities, including Rome,
Hong Kong and New York.

2

Tammet has an amazing aptitude
for remembering numbers.

They have both appeared on
television programmes.

4 Both published books.

(They) experienced difficulties
during their childhood.

9 A Read the notes and find examples of 1-6 below.

> MEMORY MEN

Tammet & Wiltshire = very gifted. They are able 2 remember lots of info.
Their abilities —> them becoming famous

The artist — Wiltshire remembers hinds he seesn

The mathematician -Tammet remembers!Alimbers does maths problems

1 an abbreviation
2 symbols for: a) and b) resulted in

3 anumber to represent a word that
sounds the same

4 aheading
5 a subheading
6 highlighted information

B Look at suggestions 1-8. Are they good or bad ideas for taking
notes? Change the bad ideas.

1 Use abbreviations and symbols.

2 Use diagrams or drawings.

3 Try to write down every word you hear/copy down every word
you read.

Write fast. Don’t worry about handwriting.

Don’t worry about spelling. You can check later.

Highlight important information.

Don’t use your own words - you might make mistakes.

Use a space or a new heading when there's a change of speaker
or topic.

ON aU SD

10A [)7.4 Listen to three people talking about memory. Tick the

things in the box they talk about.

names faces dates words birthdays directions to places

books you've read places films information about products
things that happened to you when you were very young jokes

B Read the notes about Peggy. Listen again and use the same
headings to write notes about John and Tim.

> PEGGY
Job - sales rep 4 publishing company
Memory — needs 2 remember lots
not good at directions used to get lost all the time
has to remember names faces of people she talks to + information
about products

C Compare your notes with a partner. What else can you remember
about what they say? Use the phrases below to help you.

Satly-erSamantha? makes mistakes blocking

all other students after an hour of watching a film

She spent an hour calling a woman Sally when her real name was
Samantha.

D Work in pairs. Ask and answer the questions.

1 Do you have a good memory, generally?

2 Which things in Exercise 10A are you good at remembering?
3 Which would you like to be better at remembering?

4 Do you use any special strategies to remember things?

11 A Prepare to talk about an important memory, e.g. your first day

at school, a good trip, etc.

B Tell your partner about the memory. He/She takes notes as you
speak. Then change roles.

C Write a summary (100-120 words) of what you learnt about
your partner.

--- PAGE 85 ---

7.3 )) ARE YOU QUALIFIED?

F ) clarifying opinions
@ stress patterns: short phrases
(Vv) qualifications

VOCABULARY

QUALIFICATIONS

FUNCTION
CLARIFYING OPINIONS

1 A Workin pairs. What do the words 2 A Workin pairs and discuss. Do you think people with a lot of

in bold mean? Which words are
shown in the photos?

qualifications are usually intelligent?

B 1)75 Listen to two people discussing intelligence. What do

1 What qualifications do you have? they talk about?
Apart from school exams, what intelligent animals
other exams have you taken or will a) ne iB
you take in the future? b) intelligent Eee
2 In your country do you get a ¢) ‘intelligent’ technology
certificate when you leave school? C Answer the questions, then listen again to check.
3 Do you have a driving licence? 1 Why,does the man think the boy from Egypt is intelligent?
What other licences can you get? 2, Why, does he think his friend is inteltigent” What did the friénd.da?
4 Have you ever done an online 3 Why are qualifications useful according to the woman?
course? 4 What else, according to the woman, gives you an education?
5 Is distance learning popular in your
country? Is it more popular than 3A Complete the phrases in the table.
face-to-face learning? Which do - — —
you prefer? offering opinions giving examples
6 For which professions do you have The? | say (he’s intelligent) | For example, ...
to do an apprenticeship? Does the is (that) ... Let me? you (an/another)
company usually pay you while you Forme... example.
do your training? In@ —_ view... For “ thing ...
7 Do you have a degree? From which | eter...
. . | must say ...
university?
8 Do you know anyone with an MA B ()7.6 stRESs PATTERNS: short phrases Listen to some

ora PhD? On what subject, and in
which university, did they do it?

B Discuss the questions in groups.

three-word phrases from Exercise 3A. Which word is stressed?
C 2)77 Listen to the full sentences. Copy the stress patterns.
[> page 140 LANGUAGEBANK

--- PAGE 86 ---

4 Complete the sentences with the words/phrases

in the box. Do you agree with the statements? Use
the phrases from 3A to offer your opinions and give
examples.

must Inmy Letmegive The reason!
Forone Forexample Ido For

1 |__must__ say many creative people are bad
students. , Most artists and musicians
don’t have many academic qualifications.

2 me, qualifications aren’t that important.

thing, they don’t show a person's
character.

3 view, face-to-face learning will disappear.

say that is because people want to study
from home, so they prefer distance learning.

4 think geniuses often have personal
problems. you an example: Van Gogh.

LEARN TO

REFER TO WHAT YOU SAID EARLIER

5 Read the phrases from audio script 7.5 and answer

questions 1-3.

a) Like | said, he doesn’t go to school but, for me,
he’s super-intelligent.

b) Having said that, | do think qualifications are
useful.

c) Exactly. That’s what I was saying. Like the boy
from Egypt.

Which phrase shows that you:

1 have already given an opinion that someone else
is now giving?

2 have already said something?

3 have said something but now want to give
a different opinion?

GA Complete the conversation using the
phrases below.

Like | said, That’s what | was saying.
Having said that,

A: | think online courses are great if you can’t travel
to class. ! | prefer to have a real teacher.

B: | agree. You learn more with other people in the
room.

A:2 an online teacher is not the same.

B: I've done some online courses, though. It was
really convenient because | could study at home.

A:? They’re great for people who can’t travel.

B In pairs, practise the dialogue in Exercise

6A. Make sure you stress said and saying in the
referring phrases, for emphasis. Then change roles.

? A Read the job advertisement. What type of person
would be suitable for the job? Would you like this
job? Why?/Why not?

GUIDES NEEDED FOR
eee Tt ecotours

Location: along the River Nile
Salary: £20,000

Duration: 6 months (includes four 5-week tours)
Duties: —_ introduce tourists to the plant and animal
life of the Nile, organise day trips for tourists,
write a blog. Candidate must: speak Arabic,
English, plus other language; have tour guide
licence; have university degree, qualifications
in biology and/or land management.

B Work in groups of three. Students A, B and C:
read about your candidate. What benefits can
they bring to the job? Are there any skills or
qualifications they don’t have?

Candidate A fi

Suresh Perera, Sri Lanka, 42

= was a tour guide in Sri Lanka (2 years),
geography teacher in Saudi Arabia
(10 years)

= licenced tour guide, MA in Geography

= speaks English, Arabic, Tamil

= knows Egyptian culture and people

= hobbies: sailing and swimming

Candidate B

Dr. Ahmed Nasari, Egypt, 54

= biologist (20 years), experience in ll
countries.

« PhD in marine biology

= wrote 3 books on marine biology,
writes for biology journals

« speaks Arabic, English, basic German
« will take tour guide exam next month
= wants to research Nile animal life

Candidate C

Delilah Olufunwa, Nigeria, 28

= former TV actress and model, then
tour guide in Nigeria

= degree in performing arts

= excellent physical fitness (qualified
scuba diver, strong swimmer)

= speaks English, Arabic, Spanish,
Portuguese, French, is studying Japanese

= loves animals and nature

C Present your candidate to your group.
Who should get the job? Why?

--- PAGE 87 ---

Work in groups. Discuss the questions.

1 Do you enjoy sports? Which ones?

2 Have you ever tried to learn a new sport? How
successful were you? Why?

3 Have you ever won a sporting competition or
attempted a sporting challenge? How did you feel?

Read the programme information. Why is Andy
Murray famous? What have been his biggest
achievements?

Andy Murray: The
Man Behind the Racquet

This documentary follows tennis star Andy
Murray, a US Open, Olympic and Wimbledon
champion, revealing just what it takes to bea
global sports icon. The programme looks at
Murray’s life off the court, filled with
commitments and responsibilities. Cameras
follow him as he takes an open-top bus ride in
his hometown of Dunblane, in Scotland, and as
he trains on the court in the US. A private and
shy man, Murray won the hearts of many with
his raw emotion on the court when he lost a
Wimbledon final to Roger Federer. However,
he later earned his own place in history by
winning the US Open, becoming Britain’s first
male Grand Slam champion in seventy-six
years, and then eventually with a spectacular

victory at Wimbledon. ”

Watch the DVD. What do you now know about

Andy Murray that you didn’t know before? Is there
anything in the programme which surprises you?

ray

Nn

Ww

Are the following statements true or false?

Andy Murray returns home to find the streets are
filled with people to welcome him.

Andy left home when he was fifteen years old to
move to the US and play tennis.

Andy picked up his first tennis racket when he was
just three years old. Both he and his brother played
tennis and began to win junior tournaments.

In Miami Andy trains for 6-7 hours a day, and
sometimes with other tennis stars.

Andy’s friends think he’s very serious and not
much fun to be around.

Watch the DVD again to check. Correct any

sentences which are false.

Discuss.

1

N

w

Would you enjoy the life of a professional
sportsperson? Why?/Why not?

What do you think it takes to achieve success?
Think about sport, career and other
challenges in life.

What ambitions do you hope to
achieve in your own life? What
achievements are you proud of?

--- PAGE 88 ---

speakout an achievement

5 A ()728 Listen to someone talking about
a recent challenge/achievement. Answer the
questions.

1 What was her challenge?

2 Was it a good or bad experience?
3 What did she find easy?

4 What problem(s) did she have?
5 Did she succeed?

B Listen again and tick the key phrases you hear.

[[7S°PHRASES

| found it [really easy/quite difficult].

It was the ... | had trouble with.

[I was/We were] very nervous.

At first, | couldn’t ... but then | started to ...
One thing | tried ...

| tried to/experimented with ... but it didn’t
work/I couldn't ...

| got very [frustrated/annoyed/tired].

| didn’t know how to ...

I'm [so] glad/Eventually | managed it.

It was a [really] difficult challenge/good
experience.

For me, it was quite an achievement.

BES 7.4

C You are going to talk about a recent challenge/

achievement. Before you talk, make some notes on

the following:

* What was your challenge? (Were you learning a
new sport/how to drive, etc?)

* Where were you?

* How did you feel?

* What was the experience like?/What
did the challenge involve?

* Who helped you?

* Did you try any special techniques?

* Did you succeed?

D Work in groups and take turns.

Tell each other about your

experiences. Who had the

funniest/most interesting/most

embarrassing experience?

writeback an internet post

6 A Read the internet post and answer the questions.

What was Jim’s challenge? What helped him to learn?

A beautiful language

I was never very good at languages when I was at
school so learning Welsh was a huge challenge
for me. I wanted to learn Welsh because I was
living in Wales and my wife spoke Welsh. So, I
decided to enrol for a course at the university and
go for classes twice a week. I soon fell in love with
the language — it’s so gentle and musical. I began
to realise how many people living around me loved
and treasured their national language. Welsh has
beautiful expressions and has often been called

the language of poets. It’s not an easy language
to learn, but it’s very satisfying. I feel like I’ve
achieved a lot. Now, when I go into my local shop,
I try to speak to people in Welsh. I’m sure I make
a lot of mistakes, but everyone is very kind to me,
and they always smile.

B The My Story website publishes stories from the
public about their experiences and achievements.
Write your own story (120-180 words) to submit to
the website. Use the words in bold above and the
key phrases to help.

--- PAGE 89 ---

7.5 (() LOOKBACK

@ SUCCESS

L A Underline the correct
alternative to complete the
quotes. Which quotes do you
think could be important for
you? Why?

1 ‘When you are not believing/
practising, remember someone
else is believing/practising, and
when you meet him he will
win!

2 ‘Iwas seldom able to see an
opportunity/a talent until it
had ceased to be one’

3 ‘Focus on/in where you want to
go, not on what you fear’

4 ‘Some people dream of
success, while other people
wake up and work hard on/at
it!

B Work in pairs and discuss.

1 Do you know anyone who is a
high achiever? What have they
done?

2 What are you focusing on at
the moment in your work/
studies?

3 How do you think you can get
better at speaking English?

© ABILITY

3 Complete the text with the
words in the box.

hepetess gifted skilful

useless expert ability have

@ CLARIFYING
OPINIONS |
5 A Read opinions 1-4. Find two
mistakes in each.

1 Inthe my opinion, if you want
to be a successful parent, you
need to be very patient. The
reason for | say this is that
parenting is a long process.
By my view, if you want to be
a world-class athlete, it isn’t
enough to rely on natural
talent. For the one thing, other
people will be as gifted as you.
For another, you need to focus
on your weaknesses.

I'm do think some people

have an aptitude for learning.

Let me give you example: my

cousin doesn’t work hard, but

he gets A's in every subject.

He's just a gifted student.

4 | must to say, learning an
instrument is good for
children. For the example,
my friend’s daughter has
been learning the violin since
she was three, and she has
amazing discipline and focus.

As a child, I was‘ hopeless at
school. I was 2 at maths,
English, science, everything,
because I just didn’t ® 2
an aptitude for that kind of study.
One day we were playing football
and the ball got stuck in a tree.

I climbed the tree to get it, and
one of my teachers, John
Marston, looking out of the
staffroom window, noticed that 3
I was a talented climber. He was
an 4 in climbing — he’d
been in the Alps and up Mount
Kilimanjaro — and he invited me
to try it one weekend. I really
enjoyed it. After a month, he told
me I was a very * climber
for my age. I left school three
years later with no qualifications,
but I kept climbing regularly until
I became very © at it.

In my early twenties, I became

a professional climber. I’ll always
remember Mr Marston because

he showed me I had an”

which no one else, including me,

B Work with a partner. Give
your opinions on two of the

knew about.

topics below. Include examples

© PRESENT PERFEC
CONTINUOUS

2A Complete the sentences with

of what you mean.

Being a successful parent

the present perfect continuous
form of the verbs in brackets.

1 | (practise) my lines.
Rehearsals start next week.

2 | (visit) patients in
their homes.

3 | (mark) homework for
hours.

4 | (try) some new ideas
for a recipe.

5 | (research) a news story.

B Think of a job to go with each
sentence above. Write two or
three sentences that this person
could say at the end of a busy
day. Use the present perfect
continuous.

I've been reading all day. I’ve been
saying my lines out loud.

C Work in pairs. Take turns to
say your sentences. Can your
partner guess the job?

Becoming good at a sport
Being a successful student
Learning an instrument

PAST ABILITY
4 A Underline the correct
alternative.

1 | can to/am can/can type fast.

2 When | first heard English,
| not able/not could/couldn’t
understand anything.

3 Even when I’m stressed, I’m
usually able to/can/able sleep.

4 | recently had a problem but
| can able to/was able to/
managed solve it.

5 | 'm not able/was able not/
wasn't able to do the job of my
dreams (not yet, anyway).

6 Last weekend | managed to/
managed/am managed to relax.

B Tick the sentences that are
true for you. Compare your
answers with other students.

I can't type fast because | don’t have
to look at the letters when | type.

--- PAGE 90 ---

SPEAKING

LISTENING

READING
WRITING

8.1 Describe your neighbourhood 8.2 Compare real-world and online
activities 8.3 Discuss social situations 8.4 Design a community

8.2 Listen to descriptions of online communities 8.3 Listen to people
describing guest/host experiences 8.4 Watch a BBC documentary about
aremote community

8.1 Read an article about neighbours 8.2 Read about the rise of YouTube

8.2 Write a website review 8.4 Write a web advert

BI BIC)

INTERVIEWS

©) What makes a

good neighbour?
yn

» 3

--- PAGE 91 ---

8.1

NEIGHBOURS

(G) articles and quantifiers
(Pp) stress patterns: compound nouns
(Vv) getting on; compound nouns

GRAMMAR

ARTICLES

3 A Read the paragraph about neighbours. Are you
surprised by any of the information? Why?/Why not?

(a) Astudy says that 24 percent of Americans
know most of their neighbours’ names. (b) The.
study was conducted by a group called Pew
Research, and (c) a reporter called Aaron Smith
wrote a well-known report on the study. It turns
out that (d) parents are more likely to speak to
neighbours than non-parents, and (e) the most
common way to interact with neighbours is
face-to-face. The results of the study are very
different to figures in (f) England.

B Look at the underlined words and match a)-f)
with rules 1-3.

1 Use a/an:

+ the first time something is mentioned
(new information). a _

*with jobs.

sand

VOCABULAR

GETTING ON

1 Work in pairs and discuss.

2 Use the:

* when we know which one we are talking
about.

* with superlatives. @

1 Do you know your neighbours? How well do you
know them?

2 Do you have a good relationship with them? Why?

2 A Workin pairs. Match sentences 1-5 with the

opposite meanings a)-e).

1 | get on well with my neighbour - we always

say ‘hello’ and have a chat.

| prefer to mind my own business so | don’t ask

the neighbours personal questions.

3 | sometimes invite my neighbour over for coffee.

4 My neighbour's dog is a nuisance — he’s always
barking early in the morning.

5 We didn’t get to know our neighbours for years.

N

a) My neighbour has pets but they never
disturb me.

b) My neighbour gets on my nerves -— he’s always
complaining.

c) We made friends with our neighbours
immediately.

d) | like to keep myself to myself so my neighbour
hasn't been in my house.

e) | can be quite nosy so | often ask my neighbours
about their lives.

B Which sentences are true for you? Tell other
students.

[> page 155 VOCABULARYBANK

3 Use no article:
* to talk generally about people or things. d
* with most names of places.

4 Complete the sentences below with a/an, the or
- (no article).

1 My neighbour has cat that climbs through
my window and terrorises my goldfish.
2 My neighbour is writer. He has a gossip

column, but he keeps himself to himself.

3 | have nicest neighbour in the world.
She invites me over for cakes and tea!

4 People are funny! My neighbour ignored
me for years. Now he'll chat all day.

5 My neighbour is old lady who made
friends with us as soon as we moved in.

6 My neighbour plays the drums. He’s a nice man,
but | hate all noise.

7 My neighbour is from Pakistan, and she
cooks amazing Pakistani food.

8 My best friend lives next door. She's
plumber.

[> page 142 LANGUAGEBANK

--- PAGE 92 ---

| NEIGHBOURS:

ome people just get lucky. There were the neighbourhood

friends in the USA who turned out to be a long-lost brother

and sister. There was the man whose house caught fire and

who was saved by his neighbour, who scaled a wall, climbed
through a window and beat off smoke to reach the victim. And there
are all those tales of people who rescue their neighbour’s cat, fight
off burglars, or do the shopping for their elderly neighbours.

But there are plenty of bad neighbours, too: people who refuse to
repair broken fences, let their cigarette smoke drift into your kitchen,
or knock on your door to tell you there’s a strange car parked outside
(probably your guest’s) or to remind you to mow the lawn.

In life’s lottery, you can only hope you get the Good Guys moving in
next door. Here are a few of your stories: the good, the bad and the
strange neighbours you've had.

GRAMMAR

THE GOOD THE BAD
- AND THE BIZARRE

My neighbour keeps his yard full of action figures. He has so many that they cover
the grass. He’s in his fifties, so | find it very odd, but he’s always cheerful and
happy so we have no complaints. Mary Perlmutter

| was expecting a problem with my neighbour because | have a tree with branches
that hang over their fence. One day they knocked on the door and gave me a huge
apple pie that they'd baked. Then they said, “This is made from the apples on your
tree! We hope you enjoy it.” We've been friends ever since. Max24

My neighbour has a steam engine in his garden. | think he was a historian or
something like that. He keeps it in excellent condition and lets the local kids play
on it. RGH

My upstairs neighbours hang their washing from the windows of their flat. The
clothes drip down onto our washing because we live below them. So one day
the mother came down and suggested that we do our washing on Mondays and
Thursdays and she does hers on Wednesdays and Saturdays. We tried it and it
worked perfectly! Paulina

My downstairs neighbours have lots of parties during weekends. I’m half-deaf but
even | can hear the noise. | complained once, so they invited me in. | refused. I’m
eighty-three. At my age | can’t dance like | used to. Vince

5 A Discuss with other students.
1 What type of things do good neighbours do?
2 What type of things do bad neighbours do?

B Read the text. Are any of your ideas in it?

C Work with a partner. Which of the five stories from the public
describe good neighbours? Which describe bad or bizarre
neighbours? Which could be more than one?

6 what do you think the following words/expressions mean?
a) long-lost (paragraph 1) d) mow (paragraph 2)
b) scaled a wall (paragraph 1) e) action figures (paragraph 4)
c) drift (paragraph 2) f) steam engine (paragraph 6)

QUANTIFIERS

? A Read sentences a)-f) from the
text. Circle the words that describe
quantity.

a) My downstairs neighbours have

parties.

b) But there are plenty of bad
neighbours too.

c) Here are a few of your stories.

d) We have no complaints.

e) There are all those tales of people
who rescue their neighbour's cat.

f) He has so many that they cover the
grass.

B Of the words you circled in
Exercise 7A, which of them ...
1... mean a large number/amount?
2 ... mean a small number/amount?
3... means none?
4

. two quantifiers can only be used
with countable nouns (things we
can count)?

[> page 142 LANGUAGEBANK

8 Circle the correct alternatives.

How to be a good neighbour

If someone moves in next door,
introduce yourself. If they’re new

to the area, they’ll probably have

‘a little/a lot of questions, e.g. how
’much/many times per week the
rubbish is collected. Get to know
them and give them “a bit/plenty of
information about yourself. If you do
‘all of/alot of gardening or if your kids
sometimes make too °much/many
noise, let them know. Some families
have ‘several/plenty pets. Dogs can be
noisy, and cats sometimes wander into
neighbours’ gardens or homes. If it
happens only ’a few/little times, that’s
OK, but if it happens °a lot/much, it’s
a problem. People who say they never
have °much/many trouble with their
neighbours are usually good
communicators. It’s easy: tell them
about community news and events.
Tell them beforehand about your
parties. Or, better still, invite them!

If they’re partying with you, will

they complain about the noise?
‘None!/No!

B Do you agree with the advice?
What else makes a good neighbour?

--- PAGE 93 ---

9 A Workin pairs. What features where you live do
you like/dislike? Use the photos below to help you.
Make notes about the following:

* things you like

a beautiful city centre with lots of trees and parks

¢ things that are nice but not essential

a good local supermarket

* things you hate

graffiti on the buildings

B Think about your neighbourhood. What would
make it:

* more beautiful?

* better for your health?

* more interesting?

* safer?

* more of acommunity?

I'd really like to see a good shopping mall, where people
can meet.

My neighbourhood would be healthier if there was less
traffic congestion in the mornings.

C Compare your ideas in groups.

VOCABULARY /J8UK)

COMPOUND NOUNS

10 A Read sentences 1-4 about local features. Find

and underline a compound noun in each sentence.

1 | live next to the main road, so it’s a bit noisy.

2 There's a wonderful bookshop near where | live.

3 There's a lovely public swimming pool by my
house, and it’s free for children.

4 Where | live is good for window shopping but too
expensive to buy anything!

B Match the compound nouns in Exercise 10A with
patterns a)-d) below.

a) noun + noun c) verb + noun

b) adjective + noun d) noun +verb

=
speakout TIP

Compound nouns combine two related words. The first
word gives us more information about the second,

e.g. shoe shop, history teacher, paper bag. What other words
make compound nouns with shop, teacher and bag?
Compound nouns can be written as one word, two
words or with a hyphen. Use a dictionary to check.

11 A Which words complete these compound nouns?

1 jam 6 sports
lights city }
2 park 7 high
| rental one-way }
3 centre 8 semi-detached
mall terraced }
4 super 9 housing
outdoor } industrial
5 primary 10 duty-free
language [0 gift I

B (5) 8:1) stress PATTERNS: compound nouns
Listen to check your answers. Then think about the
stress patterns. Which word is usually stressed: the
first or the second? Listen again to check.

C Discuss. Think about the place where you are
studying now. Which of the compound nouns does
it have nearby?

[> page 155 VOCABULARYBANK

--- PAGE 94 ---

Wy a

N G -IXVJI “AN

THE INTERNET

Work in groups. Look at the picture. Which type

of website would you use to:

1,
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
]

10

i
iZ

find out what is happening in the world? news site
book a holiday? travel site

contact friends? social networking

show your holiday pictures? photo sharing website
meet the partner of your dreams? dating site

show your wedding video? blog

find out whether a new film or book is good? rating site
find out about a big company? corporate website
share facts about yourself? personal homepage

read and write opinions about anything and
everything? rating site

read or write factual information about a topic? wiki
find information quickly? search engine

Rank these types of website in order of

importance for you. Which are the five most
important? Which are the two least important?
Compare your ideas with other students.

Listen to three people talking about
their online communities and answer the questions.

1 What does Speaker 1 use her website for? promote band
2 What does she put on the website during ‘a gig’

(a concert)? Photo, quotes, talking what they doing
3 What does Speaker 2 write for his blog? View restaurants

W
4 Why does he use Instagram?Pposting photo
What does Speaker 3 say is ‘probably one of the
best uses’ of Facebook? sonnet parties

6 What does he like most. about Face ook?
seeing piple's 9b00 ly photos

Work in pairs. Listen to each speaker again.
When the speaker finishes, take it in turns to use
the words and phrases below to explain what the
speakers say.

Speaker 1: band promote newsletters photos share
reach thousands

Speaker 2: food blog review restaurants photos
Instagram different dishes 2,000

Speaker 3: work from home stay in touch parties
blanket invitation phone calls family photographs

Discuss the questions.
1 Do you think websites are real communities?
2 What are the benefits of online communities?

3 Are there any dangers or problems in spending
a lot of time in online communities?

--- PAGE 95 ---

GRAMMAR

RELATIVE CLAUSES

4 Do you know how YouTube started? Read about its

origins. Why did it become successful?

The rise and rise of YouTube

In 2005, three friends, Chad Hurley, Steve Chen and Jawed Karim,
who were also colleagues, were having problems trying to email
a video clip. Within two hours they came up with an idea which
would solve the problem and change internet history. They
created YouTube. It’s a familiar story for anyone who follows the
development of the internet: technology-minded entrepreneurs
under thirty, a garage or bedroom where dreams become reality,
little money and a big need. The site was an instant success. The
key was a number of features: links to the videos, which made
them easy to email; tell-a-friend functions; a feature that allowed
YouTube videos to be played on social networking sites; and
another feature that let users comment. This helped to develop
a community: YouTube was a place where you posted videos but
also chatted about them. Two years after the launch, Google Inc.
bought YouTube for $1.65 billion.

5 A Look at the underlined clauses in the sentences
below. Which contains essential information? Which

contains extra, non-essential information?

a) Chad Hurley, Steve Chen and Jawed Karim, who_
were colleagues, were having problems trying to
email a video clip.

b) YouTube was a place where you posted videos.

B Read rules 1 and 2 to check your answers. Then
complete rule 3 with which, who, where and that.

1 Defining relative clauses tell us exactly
which thing, person or place we are talking
about.

2 Non-defining relative clauses add extra
information to a sentence. They tell us what a

sa1nu

is still grammatically possible without the
extra information.
3 is used to talk about places.

is used to talk about people.

is used to talk about things.

can be used to talk about places,
people or things (in defining relative clauses
only).

thing, person or place is or does. The sentence

C Read the text in Exercise 4A again. Find and
underline eight relative clauses. What type of

relative clauses are they: defining (D) or non-

defining (ND)?

[> page 142 LANGUAGEBANK

6 A Circle the correct alternatives to complete the text.

For people who liked to
send and receive very
short messages, Twitter.
com was a dream come
true. This social
networking site, 'that/
which was/who was the
fastest growing site in
2009, became amazingly
popular in a short space of
time. So how does it work?
You write your message,
of which must be/what
must be/which must be no longer than 140
characters, onto your profile via a web, SMS or
phone application. Then the message, *what is
called/this is called/which is called a ‘Tweet’, is
sent automatically to your subscribers or
‘followers’. The people *use/that use/are who use
Twitter say it’s fantastic. Jerry Jones, Swho works
for/who works where/which works for an
internet company, describes it as ‘a mini-
revolution’. He says that when Twitter arrived, it
was the moment ‘which online/for online/when
online communication changed. No more boring
blogs, ’what go/where people go/who people go
on and on about nothing. ‘Me and my friends,
8who all use/all use/we use Twitter, have a
saying: Keep your Tweet short and sweet!’

B Discuss the questions.

1 Do you or does anyone you know use Twitter?
2 What social networking websites do you know?
3 Which are the most popular now?

? A (2)8:3) PaUSING FOR EFFECT Listen for the
pauses where there are commas. Tick the sentence
you hear.

1 a) The travel site which we developed is really
popular.
b) The travel site, which we developed, is really
popular.
2 a) Those children who spend too much time on
the internet don’t communicate well.
b) Those children, who spend too much time on
the internet, don’t communicate well.
3 a) Video sharing sites which are free are a great
resource for students.
b) Video sharing sites, which are free, are a great
resource for students.
4 a) On that dating site where | met my wife there
are hundreds of single people.
b) On that dating site, where | met my wife, there
are hundreds of single people.

B Work in pairs. Take turns to choose a sentence
from Exercise 7A and read it aloud. Your partner
says which sentence you read, a) or b).

--- PAGE 96 ---

8.2

10a Compare the pairs of sentences.
Which sounds more fluent: a) or b)?

1 a) It’s a website. You can use it

to find magazine articles. The

articles are on lots of different

topics.

t's a website which you can use

to find magazine articles on lots

of different topics.

2 a) | know several journalists. They

use magportal.com. They use it

for research.

b) | know several journalists who
use magportal.com for research.

b)

ss

_
speakout TIP
Think about using complex sentences.
8 Look at the activities in the box below. Do you prefer doing Simple sentences can be effective, but
them online or in the real world? What are the advantages/ when we use many simple sentences
disadvantages of doing them online? Discuss your opinions together, it sounds childish: | swim every

with other students. day. | love the water. It's good exercise. We

| prefer shopping online because it’s convenient and easy. can make sentences more complex by

shopping meet new people find out the news learn a language using conjunctions ihe, Pa, but,
book flights/hotels watch films/programmes speak to friends etc.) and relative clauses: | swim every
look up information explore new places day because | love the feel of the water

and it’s also good exercise. How have the
b) sentences in Exercise 10A been made

WRITING more complex?

A WEBSITE REVIEW; LEARN TO USE COMPLEX
SENTENCES

B Rewrite sentences 1-4 to make

sound ore fluen
The website is waledes ned w hich ma Hibs it user friendly
3 A Read the website review and answer the questions. he website is well-designe e
aed design makes, it user dine
1 What type of website is it7he site has too mach animation that makes it vey. ow.and ‘Wic Ong time to upload
. 5 2° The site has too much animati

2 Why does the writer recommend it? This makes it very slow. It takes 2 a
3 Who uses the website? Why?

? The website's content comes from tonstiorgits upload ih their photos

3 The website's content comes from

as user profil a#88 wife as ere! edheap Qats they are
he site feels friendly. It has user

afl areas. Here, users can say

who they are.

Website of the Month for January is magportal.com. It's a website
which you can use to find magazine articles on lots of different

topics. One reason I'd recommend it is the range of subjects, which
include health, finance, entertainment, science and technology, C Work in pairs and compare your
sports and even pets and animals

answers.
The best thing about magportal.com is that the design is very simple,
which makes it really easy to use. There's a menu of categories and 14 A Whatis your ‘Website of the
a search engine if you want something specific. Another excellent Month’? Choose a website and think

feature is that you can get articles by typing the date - the most
recent ones are shown first - or the name of a specific magazine

about the questions below.

1 What type of website is it (photo
sharing, social networking, etc.)?

2 Why do you like it?

3 How often do you visit it?

4 Is there a community of users?

Who would you recommend it to?

| know several journalists who use magportal.com for research
| suggest that readers try it out; there’s something for everyone

B Number the features of a review in a logical order.
a) Say the purpose of the website. 5
b) Say who you'd recommend the website to.
c) Introduce the name of the website.

d) Say what special features the website has.

B write your review (120-150 words).
Show it to other students. Which
websites sound interesting to you?

C Find and underline three phrases we use to recommend

something.

--- PAGE 97 ---

MAKE YOURSELF AT HOME

VOCABULA

WELCOMING

1 A Read situations a)-f). What
expressions might we use in these
situations?

a) You are apologising for how your
home (or office) looks.

I'm sorry about all the mess!

b) You know someone is tired and you
want them to relax.

c) You are inviting someone to sit
down, maybe at work.

d) You want someone to feel relaxed
in your house.

e) You give permission for someone to
use something that is yours.

f) You are offering someone food.

B Match phrases 1-6 to situations
a)-f).

1 Make yourself at home.

2 Excuse the mess.

3 Be my guest.

4 Help yourself.

5 Havea seat.

6 Put your feet up.

C () 84) LnkING worbs Listen to
the phrases and notice how words
ending in a consonant sound (e.g. /f/)
link together with words beginning
with a vowel sound (e.g. /z/ or /a/)
so there is no pause between them.
Then listen and repeat.

Make yourself_at home.

yoursel fat home

Db) Listen to the
conversations. Listen again and
repeat the final line.

e being a good guest
© linking words

(v) welcoming

FUNCTION

BEING A GOOD GUEST

2 A Workin pairs. Discuss the questions.
1 When was the last time you were a guest? What was the

situation?

2 When was the last time you had a guest? Was he or she a good

guest? Why?/Why not?

3 What type of things do good and bad guests do in your country?

B Listen to six situations. Which speakers did something
wrong? Which speakers are asking for advice?

C Listen again and complete the notes below.

1 She says her family doesn’t ...
He wants to know if he should bring ...

He should come back in...
She forgot to take ...

au RWN

In the restaurant you have to ..
It’s Thanksgiving but her family doesn’t eat ...

3 Look at the phrases in the table and tick the ones you heard in
the conversations in Exercise 2. Read audio script 8.6 on page 172

to check.

asking for advice

question

answer

Is it OK if | (do this)?

What should we do (in this
situation)?

Do | need to (bring a dish)?
Did | do something wrong?

Is this a bad time? | can come

Yes, of course./No, you'd better
not. It’s considered a bit rude.

If | were you, I'd ...

Yes, you should./No, it’s not
necessary.

No, of course not./It’s OK. We can

back later, sort it out./Don’t worry about it.
Can you come back in ten
minutes?/Not at all. It’s fine.
| apologising

Sorry about that. | didn’t know ...
My apologies. | didn’t realise ...

[> page 142 LANGUAGEBANK

--- PAGE 98 ---

8.3

5 A Read the situations. Have you experienced any of these? Work
in pairs and discuss what you would do/say.

Situation 1

A friend of a friend is visiting your town and staying with you for
a week. You don’t know her, and she is from a different culture.
You want to give her a warm welcome, but you are not sure how
to greet her, what food and drink to offer, or what activities to
recommend while she is visiting. You phone your friend to ask
for advice.

Situation 2

You are staying with a host family abroad. The family seemed
nice at first but now there are some problems and they don’t
talk to you much. You want to study, but the family is very noisy.
They smoke inside even though you asked for a non-smoking
house. In the morning, there is never any hot water left for your
shower. You decide to talk to the mother of the family.

Situation 3

You are a vegetarian. You were invited to a barbecue at your
boss's house. When you get there, your boss gives you a large
plate of meat to eat. You do not want to offend your boss and
her family by not eating their food. A close friend/colleague is
at the barbecue, and you decide to ask for his advice.

LEARN T B Choose one of the situations. Use the flow chart below to plan

ACCEPT APOLOGIES and role-play your own situation.
4 A ©) 87 Listen to the extracts Student A

from the six situations. Number the Can | ask you about

phrases a)-f) in the order you hear something?

them. Student B

a) It’s no problem.
b) Not at all. y, Of course. Go ahead.
c) That's all right. 1

d) You really don’t have to ... | have a bit of a problem.
e) It’s fine.
f) It’s nothing.

? ‘ ?
B Work in pairs, Read situations 1-4 = MRIS ETE MES!
below and take turns to apologise

and accept the apology. It’s about ...
1 You agreed to meet your partner
for dinner. You are thirty minutes

late.
2 You accidentally wake up your / |

partner by singing loudly. You
didn’t know he/she was asleep.
3 You borrowed your partner's book.

You accidentally ripped one of the |

pages.

4 You are buying something in a
shop. You accidentally walk in front
of your partner because you didn’t C Now choose a second situation from Exercise 5A and role-play

realise there was a queue. that situation.

--- PAGE 99 ---

Work in groups. Look at the photos. Where do
you think this is? What do you think life is like for
people on an island like this? Do you think their
lives are changing in today’s modern world?

Read the programme information. What does
Bruce Perry hope to learn from visiting the tribe?

Tribe: Anuta oll

Tribe is a BBC programme in which presenter
Bruce Parry goes to some of the world’s most
isolated places. In this episode, he goes to

the Pacific island of Anuta, one of the most
remote communities on Earth. There, he learns
about their traditions, and discovers how the
community survives. There are just twenty-four
families on Anuta.
Bruce meets

them all, and
experiences how
their customs help
to bind the people
together.

What do you think the words in the box mean?
Match them with definitions 1-6.

tribe isolated remote customs survive
bind (people together)

1 form a strong connection between people

2 continue to live normally even when there are
great problems

3 something that people in a particular society do
because it is traditional

4 agroup of people with the same race, language
and customs, who live together in the same area

5 far away from other places (can also describe a

describe places)

6 far away from other places (usually used to

person who is lonely and can’t meet other people

Watch the DVD and number the scenes in the
correct order.

a) Bruce meets the children.

b) Bruce meets the community leaders.

c) Bruce catches a fish.

d) Bruce helps to repair a wall in the water.

e) Bruce arrives on the island. 1

f) Bruce says ‘I’m in Paradise’.

Circle the correct answer, a) or b).
1 When visitors arrive in Anuta, what must they do?
a) Shake everyone's hand.
b) Bring gifts to the community leaders.
2 What do the community leaders tell Bruce?
a) Their island is like Paradise and he is welcome.
b) He can stay on Anuta.
3 What happens during a ‘community fish drive’?
a) The men catch fish and the women cook.
b) Everyone in the community helps to catch fish.
4 What do they do with the fish?
a) They put them in a pile together.
b) Everyone takes home only the fish they caught.

Watch the DVD again to check.

Discuss the questions.

1 Do you think it is good that Bruce visited Anuta?
Why/Why not?

2 Would you like to visit this place? Why?/Why not?

3 Can the modern world learn anything from places
like Anuta?

--- PAGE 100 ---

out design a community

Read the paragraph from a news report. What is
going to happen? Why?

Mohamed Nasheed, the new President of the
Maldives, has a very difficult task: to find a place
for the population to live. Most of the two
hundred inhabited islands of the Maldives are
about three feet above sea level. Scientists have
explained that in the future, the Maldives will be
under water because of global warming. No one
will be able to live there and nothing will remain.

What would you do if you had to start a new

community? Think about the questions below.

1 Where would it be?

2 Who would live there? Would it be a large or small
community?

3 What laws would there be?

4 What type of government would the community
have?

5 What special customs would there be? How would
these bind the community together?

. (5) 8.8 Listen to two people discussing the first
three questions above. What do they decide for
each question?

Listen again. Tick the key phrases that you hear.

| (CSUPHRASES
| Id probably choose ...
I'd go for a place that ...
It'd need to be somewhere ...
They'd need to be able to...
| The most important thing would be ...
Ideally, there would be...
Work in pairs and plan your community.
Present your ideas to another pair.

i ae
‘4 *,

back aweb advert

Read about a project that was the subject of
a BBC documentary. What type of community is it?

Tribewanted is a community tourism project
on Vorovoro Island, Fiji. The members of
Tribewanted work with the local people to
build a village community. This community
combines Fijian traditions with international
ideas for environmentally-friendly living.
Visitors can stay between one and twelve
weeks. While there, visitors work on projects,
look after the gardens on the island, feed the
pigs and chickens, help with the construction of
buildings and write for the Tribewanted blog.
They can also learn Fijian songs, relax in a
hammock, and enjoy the incredible sunsets and
sea. It is the adventure of a lifetime.

B You are recruiting people for the Tribewanted
project. Write a web ad for people to apply. Use the
key phrases and the prompts below.

* Amazing opportunity for adventurers!

¢ Weare looking for ...

* We need people who ...

« We also want people who are able to ...

* Your responsibilities on the island will include ...
* The community is special because ...
¢ The community will ...

¢ By the end of your stay you will...

* Please send...

¢ Interviews will be...
* Other informations

--- PAGE 101 ---

8.5 (( LOOKBACK

© GETTING ON @ THE INTERNET 5 Work in pairs. Look at the list

LA Use words to make phrases 3 : ee tne oo with pe ae eee
connected with ‘getting on’. You the words in the box. what/who you defined.
ee ed ae a sites blog search travel * aperson in the room

” i“ . val video networking * an object in your bag
aan with business 1 Have you ever booked a * 2 room in the building
as if ADIcante holiday using a travel site? * a famous Book or film
eine your meniae Was it a success? ; - a famous singer
— 2 Do you ever use Video * an object on the table
Inve yourself nosy sharing sites, like YouTube? Do * atownor city
keep friends own you have a favourite clip? * aperson in the news
‘now people 3. What S€@!Ch engine do you He's the singer who ...

e over

usually use? Do you know
on

others, apart from Google? © BEING A GOOD
B Use the phrases to write four 4 Do you like social Netwitking GUEST |

sites? Do you ever get bored of

GHEE men cee them? 6 A Match comments/questions
EAYon gab Ot WEIL Mie YOUR HORS 5 Have you ever contributed to 1-5 with responses a)-e).
a_ blog ? What was the topic e€ 1 Did! do something wrong?
© ARTICLES AND eae ri eee
QUANTIFIERS and what did you write? b 2 Sorry about that. | didn’t know
6 What do you think of dating that was the boss's chair.
2 A Choose the correct option, a), Sites _? Do you know anyone c 3 My apologies. | didn’t realise
b) or c), to complete the text. who uses them? | had to shake everybody's
. ‘5 hand.
For sixteen weeks, the only thing B Work in pairs. Ask and answer d ; ncaras)
hi niches 4 |s this a bad time? | can come
we saw was ! sea. One the ques ,
: 5 F A back another time.
night, fifty miles from . .
Solomon Islands, ? storm © RELATIVE CLAUSE 4 5 Do! need to bring gifts?
hit us and 4 ship swayed a) No, it’s not necessary. We don’t
like a drunk soldier. * of 4 A Underline the correct expect them in our country.
the Beton were washed into the alternative. ™s) Don't worry about it. She
ay and aahen sola 1 __is whichAvhen/that didn’t mind at all.
Se te four wolves and a lamb vote @NNo problem. You said hello to
found a hundred fish on the deck, Snwhatinihaverorlinch rere hat’s OK
ae of them still alive, : : everybody, so that’s OK.
mouths open. We ate them with a 2 _____isa place that/how/ d) Can you come back tomorrow?
8 ihacetlenvdlanile, Aaya: where animals study humans. \'m busy for the rest of the day.
later, we were attacked by pirates. 2 is a ship who/what/ EN es you did. No one talks
They didn’t kill anyone but they that is big enough for two uring the national anthem,
stole? our food. The people in good weather but don’t worry - we can sort
captain said there was '° but only one person in bad it out.
for one week, and we were two weather. . .
weeks away from land. 4 is the hour where/ B Work in pairs. Cover
which/when the traffic stops. bespelisesa)s) Take tunis to)
1 aja b)the o)- 5 Feannah Gineeateey read the comments/questions in
2 a)a b)the o- one. topped thinkine 1-5 and to reply with the correct
3 a)a b)the o- 2 tes eon response or one of your own.
4 a)a b)the o)- whose/which job is to lend you
5 a) Little b) Few c) Some an umbrella when the sun is
6 a) little b) much c)all shining and take it back when
7 a) plenty b) few c)all it rains.
8 a) little b) lot c) few B What or who do sentences
9 a)alotof b)many ) lots 1-6 describe? Complete the
10 a) plenty of b) too c) enough sentences with the words in
B Re-read the story. What do uli [nek
you think happens next? Tell rush hour anexpert a banker
other students. friendship azoo democracy

102

--- PAGE 102 ---

we
a S
ESS

aot’

Vi

yi

{

\

Wii.

Sa

a \ fA li Be
IN OURTIME p107

GIANT LEAPS pi04
9.1 Talk about important events in history 9.2 Talk about your own history
9.3 Compile and doa quiz 9.4 Describe a person who influenced you

9.2 Listen to descriptions of past decades 9.3 Listen to people doing a quiz
about famous people in history 9.4 Watch a BBC documentary about the life
and work of Michelangelo Buonarroti

9.1 Read about important moments in history 9.2 Read about time travel
9.3 Read a quiz about famous people in history

9.1 Write ashort essay 9.4 Write a wiki entry

= i:
aib the third, itoptha
pet nthe smite erie

tba
> —..

MICHELANGELO pI12

BI BIC)

INTERVIEWS

o) Do you think Life
is better now than in
the past?

--- PAGE 103 ---

9.1

END
SEGREGATED ©
ULE:

GIANT LEAPS

Vor, :
FOR ALL RignvS z s

Ss raceare Pay Vow? e
Wl

VOCABULAR

HISTORY

1A Workin pairs. What do you think are the three most important
events in history? Which important developments are shown in
the photos?

B Read the comments below. Are any of your ideas mentioned?
A lot of revolutions have been important. For example, the
Industrial Revolution was a great turning point in history.
The development of the internet. The spread of the net has
been so fast.

For me, the greatest advances in history have been about social
justice. There have been some really important movements,
such as the Civil Rights Movement. These have made the world
a better place.

I'd choose the invention of the wheel. It's the foundation of
most transport and machines.

Maybe the discovery of fire? I think it was the most important
thing in human beings’ progress.

C Put the words in bold above in the definitions below.

1 A moment of great change: revolution

2 When someone makes or finds something new: development

Something getting better: advance

When a group of people work to achieve an aim, e.g. human
rights:

5 The basic idea behind something:

6 When something increases and affects more people:

D ()9.1 worDsTRESS Listen to the answers to exercise 1C.

Rw

Circle the stressed syllable on each word. Listen again and repeat.

E Complete sentences 1-5 in any way you choose. Compare with
other students.

1 The biggest turning point in my country’s history was ...

2 Adiscovery that changed my life is ...

3 My favourite invention is ...

4 One thing | hope won't spread is ...

5 My country has made progress in ...

[> page 156 VOCABULARYBANK

(G) hypothetical conditional: past

(Pp) word stress: contractions

(V) history

2 A Read the introduction to an article

from BBC History Magazine. What
‘alternative moments’ do you think
the historians will choose?

Giant Leaps for mankind looks at
why we should be celebrating the
Moon landing of July 1969 and
asks twelve historians to nominate
alternative moments in the past
that they consider to be giant leaps
for mankind.

B Student A: read the texts on page
105, and make notes using the prompts
below. Student B: turn to page 162.

* What was the development?

* Where did it take place?

* When did it happen?

¢ Why was it important?

3 A Work in pairs. Cover your texts.

Look at the notes you made in
Exercise 2B. Take turns to tell each
other what you read. As you listen,
make more notes.

B Work in pairs and answer the

questions.

1 Which two books helped the spread
of new developments?

2 Which advances help us to study
things?

3 Which developments happened
mainly because of one person?
Which happened because of many
people?

C Which of the four big moments did

you know about? Which do you think

are the two most important?

--- PAGE 104 ---

9.1

RAMMAR

HYPOTHETICAL CONDITIONAL: PAST

4 A Read the sentences below. Do they describe an imaginary

Galileo explores the heavens

When Galileo became the first person

to look at the sky through a telescope,

it changed our view of the universe. His
discoveries about the Sun, Moon and other
planets disagreed with older theories,
because he claimed that the Earth revolved
around the Sun and was not the centre of the
universe. He then wrote a book, Two World
Systems, published in Italy in 1630, which led
to his problems with the Roman Catholic
Church, which insisted on the older theory.
At his trial, Galileo was found guilty of
‘heresy (anti-religious beliefs). It was only in
the twentieth century that the Vatican finally
agreed with him. If Galileo hadn’t defended
his theories, he would have been a free man,
but we wouldn’t have understood the science
of our universe.

The steam engine

For most of human history we were

not very different from other animals,
which also have language, act as a group,
and have organisational systems. But

the steam engine gave us the ability to do
things faster and to do things that other
animals couldn’t. This development, which
took place in Britain in the 18th century,
was not one invention, but many. Different
people were involved at different stages:
Thomas Newcomen, James Watt and George
Stephenson. The steam engine allowed us to
transform the way we use energy. It changed
so many things, including transportation,
manufacturing and communication. Life
would have been totally different if we
hadn’t invented it.

situation in the past or an imaginary situation in the present?

1 If he hadn't written Doctrinale, education would have remained
the same.

2 If Galileo hadn’t defended his theories, he would have been
a free man.

B Look at the sentence patterns and find one other example

in the texts.

If + had(n’t) + past
subject | participle

would(n't) + have
+ past participle

If we had invented | the wheel would have been | easier.

earlier, life
hadn't fire, man’s slower.
discovered progress

C Read two more sentences from the article. How is the

grammatical structure different from the sentences in Exercise 4A?

1 We wouldn't have become the most imaginative of the animals
if we had continued eating only plants.

2 Life would have been different if we hadn’t invented the steam
engine.

[> page 144 LANGUAGEBANK

5A Complete the sentences with the correct form of the verbs

in brackets.
1 Machu Picchu (remain) unknown if Hiram Bingham
(not explore) the Andes in Peru.

2 If the ‘l love you’ virus (be) found earlier, forty-five

million computers (not crash) in 2000.

3 The development of modern medicine (be) different

if Alexander Fleming (not discover) penicillin.

4 If John Lennon (not meet) Paul McCartney, they

(not form) The Beatles.

5 The invention of the mobile phone (not be) possible

if Alexander Graham Bell (not invent) the telephone.

6 If the Nestor Film Company (not open) a film studio
there in 1911, Hollywood (remain) a quiet town.

Listen and check your answers.

C WORD STRESS: contractions Listen again and repeat. How are had,
hadn't, would and wouldn’t have pronounced in fast speech?

6 Work in pairs. Make a note of three things that have happened

to you in the last year. Show your partner. Write sentences about
how your partner's life would have been different if these things
hadn't happened.

| got a new job.

If Marcela hadn't got a new job, she wouldn't have bought her house.

2 A Work in pairs. You are going to describe a big moment in history.

Choose an important historical event. If you need help, Student A:
turn to page 163. Student B: turn to page 162.

105

--- PAGE 105 ---

106

WRITING

A SHORT ESSAY; LEARN TO STRUCTURE
PARAGRAPHS

8 Read the short essay below and answer the
question. What does the writer think would have
happened if China had reached the Americas before
the Europeans?

WHAT IE ... Chinese explorers had landed
in the Americas first?

Once, China led the world in technology. Centuries before
Europe, they had printing and gunpowder. They also had
the compass, which meant they could navigate without
relying on the position of the Moon. Furthermore, they
were brilliant shipbuilders. This ability to build large,
strong ships went hand in hand with their other talent:
exploration.

In 1405, a Chinese explorer called Zheng He went on

a journey. The idea was to create new trade routes for
China. On his first trip, he took 28,000 men in sixty-two
ships. Zheng He landed in India and brought home many
things that were new to the Chinese: plants, animals,
even people.

Zheng He made seven westward journeys. If he had
continued to explore, he would probably have reached the
Americas before Columbus and the Europeans. However,
for political reasons, China stopped exploring. Its leaders
believed that China didn’t need to trade with other
nations so the country became isolated.

Now, let's imagine Zheng He had reached the Americas
first. What would have happened? He would have seen
the incredible size of the country and the riches in the
ground. He probably would have returned with more men
and maybe gone to war with Native Americans in order to
steal their land. If the Chinese had won, they would have
become rich. The new Chinese colony would have grown
and grown, and perhaps they would have later spread to
other lands.

Would China have created the next great empire if
Chinese explorers had landed in the Americas first?
We will never know.

9 Work in pairs. Put the six stages of essay-writing in
order.

a) Write a second, final draft.
b) Proofread before you submit your work. Look for

errors in grammar, spelling and punctuation.

c) Look carefully at the task/title you are given. What

do you need to do: analyze, compare, argue?

d) Check that the sections of the first draft are
well-organised. Think about how you can
reorganise any unclear parts.

e) Brainstorm ideas. Write down lots of thoughts
quickly and don’t worry if they are not all good
ideas,

f) Write a first draft quickly - it doesn’t have to be
perfect.

10 A Read the paragraph below. Then read the key.

Key:
CD = linking words
> = topic sentence

> = supporting sentence 1
WY = supporting sentence 2
) = supporting sentence 3

B Complete statements 1-3 using the labels from
the key.

1 Each paragraph should have a that
explains the main idea. Often this is the first
sentence.

2 Each paragraph needs several to

provide examples that illustrate the main idea.
The examples should connect well, using

w

C Look at the essay in Exercise 8 again. Use the
labels in 10A (linking words, topic sentence, etc.) to
label the first paragraph of the essay.

Af A Read instructions 1-4 for a What if ... ? essay.
1 Choose an important development in history:
an invention, a discovery or an event.
Think about the world without this development.
How would life be different? How would people’s
ideas or actions be different? Brainstorm ideas.
3 Plan and write your essay.
4 When you finish, follow the instructions in the
Speakout tip.

N

=>
speakout TIP

1 Check the ‘big’ things first: did you answer the question
in the title? Are the paragraphs in the right order? Is there
anything missing?

2 Check the ‘little’ things second: grammar, spelling,
punctuation, missing words.

B Exchange your essay with another student and
check each other’s work.

--- PAGE 106 ---

IN OUR TIME

GRAMMAR 4

ACTIVE VERSUS PASSIVE

1 Look at the picture. When do you think it was
taken? What do you think life was like for these
people compared to the way young people live now?

Maybe the picture is in the 1960s. They probably had
more fun than young people now.

2 A Read the paragraph and choose the best title.
1 The best time to live
2 How the young found their voice
3 New generations, new names

After World War II, a generation was born that has
come to be known as Baby Boomers. They are thought
to be healthier, wealthier and more optimistic than any
previous generation. They were followed by Generation
X, a name that was invented by photographer Robert
Capa. Generation X includes people born between the
mid-60s and the early 80s. This generation is sometimes
called the MTV Generation, as it supposedly grew up
watching music videos. Generation X is known for
entrepreneurship and open-mindedness in regard to
race, gender, class, and religion. Following Generation X
is Generation Y or ‘Millennials’, who were born between
the early 1980s and 2000. They are known for being
confident, informal, and desperate to share their lives
with others via social networking. They arrived at a time
of great technological change and are perhaps the first
generation that is being educated for jobs that may not
exist at the moment.

B Read the extracts from the text and do
questions 1-3.
qa a) They are thought to be healthier ... than any
previous generation.
a b) This generation ... grew up watching music videos.
p ¢) [This] generation has come to be known as Baby
Boomers.
a d) They arrived at a time of great technological change.
Pe) The first generation that is being educated ...

1 Underline the verbs in each sentence.

2 Three of the sentences don’t say who ‘did’
the action (because we don’t know or it’s not
important). Which three?

3 Which sentences use active verbs? Which use the
Passive?

C Look at the sentences again. Complete the rule.

Z| We form the passive with: subject + the verb
= (in the present, past or other tense)
+ past participle.

D Find other examples of the passive in the text.
[> page 144 LANGUAGEBANK

(G) active vs passive
@ weak forms: are, has been, was and were
(Vv) periods of time; collocations

3 A Rewrite the sentences below using the passive.
1 Douglas Coupland made the name Generation X
famous through his novel, Generation x: Tales for

an Accelerated Culture.

The name Generation X was made famous by

Coupland’s novel.

2 Sometimes the media invents names for different
generations.

3 Newsweek magazine used the term Generation
9/11 in 2001.

4 Someone gave the people growing up after the
war the name ‘Baby Boomers’.

5 In the future, people will know today’s babies as
Generation Z.

6 William Strauss and Neil Howe wrote a book
about Millennials (Millennials Rising: The Next Great
Generation).

7 Sometimes people call the generation born from
1910 to 1920 ‘The Greatest Generation’.

8 Older people have always criticised younger
people for their bad behaviour!

2.3 WEAK FORMS: are, has been, was and were
Listen and check your answers.

C Listen again and notice the pronunciation of
are /a/, has been /hazbin/, was /waz/ and were /wa/.
Then listen and repeat.

D Discuss with other students. What do you think
of the idea of different generations? Are there real
differences between them? Give examples.

10?

--- PAGE 107 ---

ye
LISTENING VOCABULARY

4 A B94 Listen to three people speaking about PERIODS OF TIME
different decades. Which decades did they grow
up in? Generally, do they feel positive or negative
about that decade?

—_
speakout TIP

Before listening, read the task. Which are the most
important words? Listen for those words and for their
synonyms or words with a similar meaning. For example:
North Americans = people from the United States;

films = movies; environmental problems = pollution and
the hole in the ozone layer; fashion = clothes/hairstyles.
Read the task in Exercise 4B and listen for the key
words and synonyms.

B Listen again and answer the questions.

1 What ‘two important aspects’ of his life does
Speaker 1 mention?

2 What ‘celebrations’ do you think Speaker 1 is
talking about?

3 Where is Speaker 2 from?

4 Which musician was ‘an icon’ for Speaker 2?

5 What two things did Speaker 3 think he didn’t like
during the 80s (he later changed his mind)?

6 What trend did Madonna start in the mid-eighties?

5 A Read the underlined sentences in audio script

9.4 on pages 173 and answer the questions.

1 Which decade do you think was good for film
and music?

2 What was ‘one of the most memorable moments’
of the decade in which you grew up?

3 Were things ‘developing and getting better’
for your generation?

4 What part of your past do you like
‘in retrospect’?

B Discuss your answers with other students.

G A Put the words and phrases in order from the

shortest to the longest periods. Use a dictionary
to help you.

adecade amillennium, anera acentury

a quarter-century a fortnight an age

the nineteen-seventies/eighties (1970s, 1980s)
the seventies/eighties (70s/80s) a generation

B Complete sentences 1-8 with your own words.
1 The best thing about this decade so far has been ...
2 The worst thing about this decade so far has been ...

3 One thing | know/remember about the
nineteen-nineties is ...

My generation is sometimes criticised for our ...
One thing that represents my parents’ erais ...
This era is represented by ...

This is the first century in which ...

One big change in the next quarter century might
be...

C Compare your sentences with other students.
Are there any that you agree on?

ON AW

2 A Choose a period when you were a child,

a teenager or in your twenties. What did people
listen to/do/watch/wear? How did it change as you
got older? Make some notes about the following:
emusic — «fashion * technology

* sport *TVand/or films — * issues in the news

B Work with other students and talk about your
chosen period of time.

When | was young, only a few programmes were shown
on TV. Now there are hundreds.

--- PAGE 108 ---

VOCABULARY U iS C Look at the underlined phrases and add them to

COLLOCATIONS the word webs below.

8 A Read the text and answer the questions. naturally (easily)

1 According to the writer, what do ‘normal people’ ____back___ (return)
think of time travel? by car (ways to travel)
2 Why is time travel probably boring? rst (win)

3 Why is it probably not the solution to man’s

problems?
B Read the text again. Find and underline eight _ instruction (say what to do)
phrases with come, give, have and make. The first - talk (make a speech)
two have been done for you. ENS call (phone me)

_direction (say where to go)

good time (enjoy yourself)
Time Travel : dream (future ambition)
ave
trouble h bl
All theoretical physicists have the same oe. iheve presenta! ;
break (relax for a short time)

dream. They want to travel in time.
Normal people like you and me have
trouble believing that time travel is

decision
possible. The idea is outside our =. Keiroose)

AAR

imagination and such thoughts just =e __mess____ (make untidy/dirty)
don’t come naturally to us. We can’t Progress (improve)
imagine seeing our parents as little profit (get more money than

children taking their first steps, or our you invested)
grandparents’ youthful faces as smooth
and unlined as glass. We can’t imagine
watching Stone Age men dragging dead
animals to their caves, or watching
Alexander the Great conquering half

D Look at the words in the box and add them to
the word webs above. Then add any other phrases
with come, give, have and make you can think of.

the world, or seeing Mozart at his piano. “Fest atalk a Break a profit
And the truth is, even if we could travel agoodtime a decishag (someone) acl
in time, unless we could also choose an
exact moment in an exact place, it [> page 156 VOCABULARYBANK
would probably be very boring. When
we read history books, the past always 9 A Think of a time when you...
sounds exciting. But humanity makes 1 ... made really good progress in something.
progress slowly. And Stone Age man 2 ... gave instructions on how to do something.
didn’t own TVs for entertainment. 3... had trouble with a machine or a person.
If time travel is ever possible in the & ... herd agen time. .
future. tine travellers enone eters 5 ... had a break from your normal routine.
) P Y .
us now, today. And if they exist, they 6 ... gave a talk to an audience.
have come back from a time in the 7 ... came first at something.
future and are watching while we make 8 ... made an excellent decision.
a mess of the world. Why don’t they 9 ... made a mess of something.
give us directions on how to save the 10 ... had an interesting dream.
planet? Why don’t they give instructions B Choose two or three of your experiences and tell
about the environment or how to stop _ other students what happened.

war? Here’s a sad thought: maybe they
don’t know the answers either.

saa as

--- PAGE 109 ---

9.3 )) |HAVE NO IDEA! @ expressing uncertainty

@ intonation: showing interest
(Vv) describing people

|SPEAKING
L Work in pairs and discuss.

1 What are the most famous quiz shows in your
country? Do you like them?

2 What type of questions do they ask (history,
general knowledge, culture, etc.)?

3 If you had to answer quiz questions on one
subject, which subject would you choose?

4 If you had to answer questions on one famous
person in history, who would you choose?

I'd choose Walt Disney because | loved his films when |

was young and | read his biography.

VOCABULARY

DESCRIBING PEOPLE

2 Work in pairs. Do the quiz about famous people
in history. If you don’t know the answers, guess or
look at the photos to help.

3 A Workin pairs and look at the quiz again.
What do the words in bold mean? Use a dictionary
to help you.

B Choose three or four of the adjectives in Exercise
2 and think of a famous person for each adjective.
Compare your ideas with other students.

Diego Maradona - He is probably the most influential
sportsperson in the history of Argentina.

Which charismatic religious leader, who spoke out
against racism in South Africa, first worked as an
English teacher?

a) Mother Teresa b) Desmond Tutu c¢) Pope John Paul II

Which influential politician was killed by her own
bodyguards?

a) Margaret Thatcher b) Eva Peron ce) Indira Gandhi

Which innovative anthropologist fed bananas to wild
chimpanzees to gain their trust?

a) Jane Goodall b) Louis Leakey c) Margaret Mead

Which inspirational scientist spent his free time
playing the violin when he wasn't changing the world?

a) Galileo b) Albert Einstein c) Isaac Newton

Which brave and exemplary activist refused to give
up a bus seat and helped start the civil rights movement?

a) Che Guevara b) Nelson Mandela ¢) Rosa Parks

Which amazingly original and creative writer was
banned from entering the United States for years?

a) Isabel Allende b) Charles Dickens

c) Gabriel Garcia Marquez

110

--- PAGE 110 ---

FUNCTION LEARN TO

EXPRESSING UNCERTAINTY REACT TO INFORMATION
4a):

Listen to someone doing the quiz. Which GA Db) INTONATION: showing interest Read the

questions does he get right?

B Look at the phrases in the box. Match them to
the groups of phrases below.

| don’t know | know it isn’t/wasn’t ...
I'm not sure but | think... | used to know

1 | have no idea, | haven't a clue

2 , I'm not a hundred percent certain but it
might be ..., I'm fairly sure it’s ...
3 , It's definitely not, I’m sure it isn’t

4 | can’t remember, I’ve forgotten

C Listen again and tick the phrases you hear.
[> page 144 LANGUAGEBANK
5A Complete speaker B’s responses in the

conversations by adding the pairs of words
in the box.

havene fairlysure percent certain sure it
haven'ta l’ve forgotten Ican't it’s definitely

1 A: Which sculptor is famous for the statue of
David? Was it Leonardo da Vinci or Michelangelo?
have no
B: Ifidea. | don’t know anything about art.

2 A: What's the name of that American politician
who made a film about the environment?

B: Oh, um, remember. Was it Rumsfeld? No, um,
Bush?

3 A: Who was the white South African leader who
freed Mandela?

B: I'm it was Botha, wasn't it?
4 A: Who's that Mexican actor who was in Amores
Perros?

B: Oh, his name but | know who you mean. He's
quite small and good-looking.
5 A: Which company invented the CD-ROM?

B: I’m not a hundred but it might be Sony.
6 A: Do you know who wrote The Lord of the Rings?
Wasn't it William Golding?

B: | don’t know, but not Golding.
7 A: Who won the last football World Cup?

B: I’m wasn’t England.
8 A: What was the name of that Steven Spielberg
film about dinosaurs?

B: | clue. | don’t watch Hollywood movies.

B Work in pairs and answer the questions. Try to
use some of the phrases for expressing uncertainty
in exercises 4A and 5A. Then turn to page 159 to
check your ideas.

extracts from audio 9.5. Then listen and notice the

intonation patterns speaker B uses.

1 A: It was B, Desmond Tutu.

B: Oh really?

A: Yes.

B: Oh no, | didn’t know that.

A: It leaves you with A. Very good. It was Jane
Goodall.

B: Yes, that’s right!
4 A: So the last one.

B: That's interesting.
5 A: It was C!

B: Excellent, excellent!
B Answer the questions.

1 Which information did speaker B know already?
2 Which information was new?

2 A Workin pairs. Student A: you are going to ask

Student B the questions below. First, add two more
questions of your own. The answers can be found
on page 159. Student B: turn to page 162.

Geography

1 What's the capital of Australia? Is it Sydney,
Melbourne or Canberra?

2 Which country has the second biggest population?
Is it China, India or Russia?

3 Which one of these countries is not next to the
sea: Venezuela, Ecuador or Paraguay?

4

5

B Discuss with other students. Do you think it’s
important for people to know facts about the past?
Why?/Why not? What do you think we can learn
from history? Think of some examples.

111

--- PAGE 111 ---

)) MICHELANGELO

L. Discuss. What do you know about the painting below, and the artist

who created it?

Read the sentences about Michelangelo. What do you think the
words in bold mean? Which two pairs of words have opposite

meanings?

His work is unique — no one has ever done anything similar.
Some said his work was divine because only God could create
such beauty.

His fame is eternal. He will never be forgotten.

The sculptures are extraordinary. They are incredibly beautiful
and realistic.

Although he was mortal, his work will never die.

His art is awe-inspiring. We feel small when we look at it.

His painting on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel is an
incredible feat.

In those days, many normal men worked with stone, but he was
far from ordinary.

Even as a child, he had aspirations to be a great artist.

As a young man in Florence he began his quest for fame.

Read about the BBC programme, The Divine Michelangelo. What is
the contrast between Michelangelo's life and his art?

The Divine Michelangelo 188 1c)

This BBC documentary examines the life and work of
Michelangelo Buonarroti, one of the greatest artists in history.
It looks at his background as a child in Florence, and how he
went on to produce works such as the statue of David, the
awe-inspiring ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, and the dome

of St Peter’s Cathedral, described here as ‘the jewel in the
crown on the Roman skyline’. The programme also reveals
Michelangelo’s tempestuous life, his fights with rivals and
with his own demons, showing that an imperfect life can

cdl | produce perfect art.

Which of these sentences do you

think are true?

1 Michelangelo was a sculptor, painter
and architect.

2 He said he was divinely inspired
(inspired by God).

3 He lived and worked three hundred
years ago.

4 His mother died when he was a child.

He was from a rich family.

6 His father always wanted him to be
an artist.

Watch the DVD to check.

uw

Read the notes. Which words do
you think are missing?

Who was Michelangelo?
... a tempestuous genius ... he wanted
eternal fame and +__riches

... an outsider who created works so big
and so * that nobody believed they
were produced by a mortal

... NOT an ordinary labourer or honest,

stonecutter
Background
... had an4 childhood, father,

Ludovico, was a lowly-paid local official

What did he do?
... persevered and produced works which
showed an extraordinary °*

... Created a unique vision of heaven
6
on

Watch the DVD again and complete
the notes.

Work in groups and discuss. What
do you think of Michelangelo's work?
Have you ever seen any of his work?
How do you think his work has
influenced other artists?

--- PAGE 112 ---

out influential work

(>) 9.7 Listen to someone
talking about someone whose work
influenced her. Who does she talk
about? How did this person’s work
change her life?

B Listen again and tick the key
phrases you hear.

PHRASES
| fellin love with his novels.
That book really made its mark
on me.
It had a big impact on me.
He's one of the best-known writers.
I'm a big fan of that type of writing.
The style is brilliant.
It was very influential.
He/She/Their work [really] inspired/
influenced me .../to [do] ...

C Plan to describe someone whose

work influenced you. Write brief

notes about the following:

* what they did

¢ their place in history

* what you learnt from them

* how it has influenced the way you
do things

D Work in groups and take turns to

describe your person.

back a wiki entry

© A Read the proposal.
Subject proposal

Dear student,

We are compiling a student wiki about world-famous, influential
people in the arts and sciences. Please write a short piece (no more
than 200 words) including information about where they live(d), when
they did their work, their place in history, why they are influential, and
who they have influenced. Do not write about political leaders, sports
stars or businesspeople. Send your entry to the web address ...

B Read an example entry. Does it fit the requirements in the
proposal? Is anything missing?

Ravi Shankar is probably India’s most famous musician. A sitar-player,
composer, performer, musical director and teacher, he is best known in
the west for his collaborations with George Harrison of The Beatles, who
studied sitar under him and later produced some of Shankar's records.

Born into a wealthy family in 1920, at the age of ten Shankar went to
Paris with his brother's dance group. By thirteen, he was part of the group,
working as a dancer and playing different instruments. A few years later
he decided to focus full time on the sitar and soon became a master of
the instrument. In the 1950s and 60s he toured the world, giving Indian
classical music a wider audience. It was during this time that he met and
influenced Harrison and other well-known musicians from the UK and
the United States.

Shankar wrote film scores and recorded numerous popular albums.

He was deeply committed to playing live music, and even performed

at Woodstock during the hippie era. In his seventies and eighties he was
still performing regularly. He has been very influential because he helped
to bring Indian music to the rest of the world.

> Now write your wiki entry about the person whose work
influenced you. Use the wiki above and the key phrases to help.

--- PAGE 113 ---

9.5 (( LOOKBACK

114

@ HISTORY

1 A Work in teams. Use the words in the box to make
ten true sentences. Use one word in each sentence.

© THE PASSIVE

4A Complete the sentences with the correct passive
or active form of the verbs in the box.

revolution turning point development
movement spread advance invention
foundation discovery progress

B Write down three of your sentences and read
them to the class. Are any of your sentences
similar? Which group has the most original
sentences?

CONDITIONAL: PAST
2 A Read headings 1-6. Write a sentence about your
past for each heading.
1 School
| loved school and did well in my final exams.
2 Hobbies and how you began
3 Work: choices or hopes
4 Family and relationships
5 Influences in life
6 Opportunities to do interesting things
B Exchange sentences with a partner. Choose
three of your partner's sentences. Write about your
partner's life using hypothetical conditionals in the
past.
If Dayo hadn't liked school, he probably wouldn't have
done so well in his exams.

© PERIODS OF TIME

3A Complete the sentences with words for periods
of time.

1 Inwhichd_____ were you born?

2 What can you remember about the

What's your favourite e__ in history?
5 If you could go back in time foraf_______ 4
where and whatc_____ would you choose?

6 What do you think your g
famous for?

3 How did you celebrate the new m 7

S

B Work in pairs. Take turns to ask and answer the
questions.

discover assassinate become build climb
declare destroy elect release identify

1 The tomb of Tutankhamun was discovered in the
Valley of the Kings, Egypt.
2 US and French scientists the AIDS virus.
Awall between East and West Germany.
4 Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay
Mount Everest.
5 The Titanic after hitting an iceberg in the
North Atlantic.

w

6 Nelson Mandela from prison.
7 Mahatma Gandhi by a terrorist.
8 Margaret Thatcher, the UK's first female prime
minister,
9 The UK and France war on Germany.
10 Two-year-old Pu Yi Emperor of China.

B Match the events above with the dates in the box.

1922 1908 1912 1939 1948 1953 1961
1979 1984 1990

1922: The tomb of Tutankhamun was discovered.

C Work in groups. Compare your answers and
correct each other's work if necessary.

@ EXPRESSING UNCERTAINTY

5 A Put B’s words in the correct order to complete

the conversations.

1 A: What was yesterday’s homework?

B: forgotten / sorry, / I've
2 A: Is there anywhere you can smoke in this
building?
B: allowed / it’s / definitely / no, / here / not
3 A: What time does this school open in the
morning?
: at / fairly / opens / sure / I’m /it /7a.m.
: What was your last teacher’s name?
: remember / can't /|
Do you know where the nearest restaurant is?
: clue / sorry, / haven't /1/a
: What's the school director’s name?
2 it / not /a/ might / I'm / percent / but / certain,
/ be / hundred / Timothy

A: How far away is the nearest supermarket?
B: isn’t / it / sure / far / I'm
A: Where's the nearest bank?
B: no/1/ idea / have / sorry,

wu
Droarwrw

B Work in pairs. How many of your partner’s
questions can you answer?

--- PAGE 114 ---

i ire hi
Ne
Hate ave ¥ t ie? "
) Tesla ve yy | f

’ v

ih.

SPEAKING 10.1 Discuss ideas for reducing plastic waste 10.2 Recommend acity for B | |B |

food 10.3 Ask for/Give travel advice 10.4 Talk about an endangered place

LISTENING 10.2 Listen to descriptions of the world’s best food cities 10.3 Listen to people INTERVIEWS
giving advice/warnings 10.4 Watch a BBC documentary about the Arctic’s ©) What are the biggest
melting ice caps problems facing the

READING 10.1 Read about a man who tried to Live ethically forayear 10.3 Read advice

world today?
Kon
about what not to do in an airport

WRITING 10.2 Write arestaurant review 10.4 Write an email campaigning for acti

--- PAGE 115 ---

10.1 )) ETHICAL MAN @ reported speech

@ weak forms: auxiliary verbs

VOCABULAR y

THE ENVIRONMENT

1A workin pairs and discuss. How important is ‘green living’ to you?

B Look at the sentences below and try to explain the meaning of
the words/phrases in bold. Then use a dictionary to check.
1 How much of the food you buy is pre-prepared or processed?
How much is organic?

2 How much of the food you eat is produced in the country you
live in?
How is your home heated? Do you use energy-saving light bulbs?
Is your house insulated and/or double-glazed?
Do you turn lights/machines off or leave them on standby?
When you're buying a product, do you consider how to recycle
the packaging?

7 How often do you buy, sell or give away secondhand items?

8 How much of your rubbish is recycled?

9 How many hours a year, on average, do you spend flying?
10 How often do you use a car?

au hw

[| My name’s Juston Rowlatt
C Answer questions 1-10 above. and I’m the BBC's Ethical Man.

D Work in pairs and compare your answers. [2 | My iamaly endl lenantetvaar ceine

[> page 157 VOCABULARYBANK everything we could to try to reduce ~~
our impact on the environment.
We changed the light bulbs in our
PREADING house to energy-saving bulbs.
We changed the way we heat —
2A Justin Rowlatt, a BBC journalist, decided to try living a greener and power our home. We stopped
lifestyle for a year. What changes do you think he made? flying and we got rid of the car.

Instead we walked, used bicycles,

B Read the article to find out.
or took public transport. We did

C Work in pairs and answer the questions below. our supermarket shopping online, =
1 Why did Justin decide to try living ethically for a year? ate organic vegetables and I even
2. Did he and his family enjoy the experience? stopped eating meat (for a month).
3 What kinds of things did they try to change? My heavily pregnant wife, Bee,
4 Why is Justin travelling to America? walked two miles to hospital in the
5 How does he plan to travel? middle of the night, to give birth to
6 What sorts of solutions is he looking for? our third daughter, alls. When we)
; ; . ; . went on holiday to France, instead
D Discuss. Do you think the ‘Ethical Man’ experiment is a good of choosing a two-hour flight, we
idea? Why?/Why not? How do you think society could reduce went on a nightmarish twelve-hour
carbon emissions? journey on the train, in a heatwave.
3 Read the article again. Underline words/phrases in the text that EX [had hoped our efforts would
match meanings 1-6. demonstrate how normal families ———s
1 the amount of damage we do (by our actions) to the air, water could help to reduce their impact
and land on Earth (paragraph 2) on the environment. But despite
2 threw away or destroyed (paragraph 2) our best efforts, we only reduced
3 terrible - like a bad dream (paragraph 2) our greenhouse gas emissions by
4 period of very hot weather (paragraph 2) 20 percent. Clearly the efforts of
5 the effects of trying very hard (paragraph 3) ethical men and women acting
6 to follow something or someone (paragraph 6) alone are not the answer. So what is?

116

--- PAGE 116 ---

I’ve had a new idea. And now I’m
travelling across America in search
of some solutions. Each American is
responsible for twenty tons of carbon
dioxide emissions, more than twice
that of the average European.

Gi The idea of the trip is simple.

I think if we can solve it here

we can solve it anywhere. But,

as Ethical Man, I have to keep

my environmental impact to a
minimum. Of course I’m going to
fly from Britain, but after that my
challenge is to get around in the
most low carbon way possible. I'll
be travelling 6,500 miles, so it’s not
going to be easy, but I will use public
transport wherever possible. During
my trip, I'll talk to ordinary people,
businessmen and politicians to hear
their views on climate change and
discuss ways in which we can try
to reduce carbon emissions. And I'll
drive an electric car.

You can track my progress on
the map and watch our video
reports along the way. Please give
me advice; I want your thoughts
on what we need to do as societies
to make the cuts in emissions that
are needed. Do you have an idea
for a solution to climate change?
Are you inventing the solution in
your garage? If you are, please let
me know.

GRAMMAR j

REPORTED SPEECH

4A Complete the table to show how tenses change in reported speech.

10.1

direct speech

reported speech

wherever possible.’

yo across America...’ | He said he was travelling across
America ...
V2 use public transport | He said he would use public

transport wherever possible.

‘My heavily pregnant wife, Bee,
b

He said he that his wife had walked

two miles to hospital.’ | to hospital.

‘| think if we can solve it

He said he 4 if they could

would demonstrate ... ’

here...’ solve it there ...’
". a new idea. He said he’d had a new idea.
‘le hoped our efforts He said he had hoped their efforts

would demonstrate ...

‘Do you have an idea ... ?’

He asked if anyone ’ an idea...

‘Each American ®
responsible for twenty tons of
carbon dioxide emissions’

He said each American is responsible
for twenty tons of carbon dioxide
emissions.

B Check your answers using the article in Exercise 2B.

C Look at the table again. Match each sentence to one of the rules.

s31nu

1 When we report speech, we often move the tenses back
(backshift), e.g. present simple — past simple, present
continuous — past continuous, present perfect — past perfect,
will + would.

2 If what the person says is still true, we can keep the tenses
the same, e.g. ‘It’s the 16th’ — She said it’s the 16th.

3 In reported speech, we may also need to change pronouns
and time references, e.g. ‘I'll see you tomorrow, — He said he
would see her the next day.

4 \n reported questions, the word order is the same as that
for statements.

[> page 146 LANGUAGEBANK

5A Complete the sentences by adding one word.

1 We changed the light bulbs in our house. [Justin]
He said they had changed the light bulbs in __ their _ house.
2 | have a new idea. [Justin to his wife]
He said he a new idea.
3 We're going to live a more ethical lifestyle. [Justin to Bee]
They said that were going to live a more ethical lifestyle.
4 |'m going to take a taxi to hospital. [Bee to Justin]
She said she going to take a taxi to hospital.
5 We're hot. [children to parents]
The children said were hot.
6 We've achieved a lot. [Justin and Bee]
They said they achieved a lot.
7 | didn’t eat meat for a month. [Justin]
Justin said he eaten meat for a month.
8 | had expected the car to be slower. [Justin]
He said he expected the car to be slower.
BD) _ WEAK FORMS: auxiliary verbs Listen to check your

answers. Notice how have/had/was/were are weak forms or
contractions. Listen again and shadow the sentences.

--- PAGE 117 ---

VOCABULARY (JUS

6 A Workin groups. Group A: look
at the photo and read the fact file
below. Discuss the questions and
make notes about your discussion.
Group B: look at the photo and read
the fact file on page 163.

118

THE PLASTIC PROBLEM

Did you know ...?

The world uses 1 million plastic bags per
minute.

Over the last ten years we have produced
more plastic than during the whole of the
last century.

50 percent of the plastic we use, we use just
once and throw away.

The ‘Pacific Ocean Garbage Patch’ is an area

in the Pacific Ocean filled with waste plastic.

The area may be as big as 5 million square
kilometres (more than twice the size of the
USA). Millions of marine animals die when
they eat the plastic, become caught in it, or
feed it to their young.

Enough plastic is thrown away each year to
circle the earth four times.

1 Why does the problem exist?
2 What should be done about it?

3 What laws/schemes would you
introduce to deal with the problem?

B Look at your notes and prepare
to tell another student about your
discussion. Use reported speech.

We talked about ... Juan said that ...
Caterina thought that ... Akiyo asked
VF sac

C Work in pairs with a student from
the other group. Tell them about the
discussions you had in your group,
and any ideas you had.

WORD BUILDING: PREFIXES

? A Lookat the example sentences 1-10 and underline the prefixes.
un-
1 It's very unusual to have snow in April.
2 The whole situation was completely unreal.
re-
3 Most glass bottles and aluminium cans can be recycled.
4 Don’t throw away the bottles. They are reusable.
dis-
5 | disagree with using the car for short journeys.
6 She would never disobey her parents.
mis-
7 Don’t misunderstand me. | want to help.
8 | always mispronounce his name.
over-/under-
9 She hardly eats anything, and she’s very underweight.
10 | think I’ve overcooked the pasta.

B Match the prefixes above with meanings 1-5.

1 not:__un- and 4 too little:
2 again: 5 wrong:
3 too much:

8 add prefixes to the words in brackets to complete the sentences.

1 He's lying. His story about how he cycled across Africa was
completely (believable).

2 It's easy to (judge) somebody’s character by looking
at the clothes they wear.

3 Much of the snow in the Arctic has completely (appeared).

4 These organic potatoes are delicious. Be careful not to

(cook) them.

5 Jessica decided not to accept the job because the company’s
policies were (ethical).

6 | think I’ve done this all wrong. | probably (understood)
the instructions.

7 My house is always
organise my things.

8 She walks to work every day, despite her (ability).

[> page 157 VOCABULARYBANK

(tidy). | don’t have enough time to

=>
speakout TIP

Use prefixes to guess the meaning of words you don’t know. Look at the
words in bold below. Can you use the prefix to guess their meaning?

9 Work in pairs and take turns. Ask and answer the questions.
1 Which professions in your country do people often mistrust?
2 Who in your country is very famous now, but was unknown last
year?
3. What kinds of documents do you sometimes need to renew?
4 Do you believe scientists have overestimated or
underestimated the problem of climate change?

5 Do you disapprove of people who drive their cars everywhere?
Why?/Why not?

--- PAGE 118 ---

CG] verb patterns
@ weak forms: to, for, that

Cv) reporting verbs

WORLD FOOD

LISTEN q

1 Work in pairs and discuss. 3A Do you know any cities which are
good for food? What types of food
are they best known for? Which areas
have good restaurants? Plan to talk
about your favourite food city. Use
these phrases from the listening to
make some notes.

1 What's the best street food you've ever eaten?
2 Is there anything you would never eat?

2 A) 102 Listen to two people talking about their favourite
food city. According to the speakers, which city, Hiroshima (H)
or Madrid (M), has the following:

1 asmall, cheap restaurant which serves wonderful seafood?

2 informal restaurants where you order lots of dishes which
everyone shares and eats from the middle of the table?

3 something to eat which is like a cross between a pancake and

My favourite food city is ...
They've got all sorts of ...
XXX is really famous for its ...
It’s a kind of ...

a pizza?
4 people getting together at Sunday lunchtime to have a few bites It's really good (for) ...
to eat? | think my favourite restaurant in ... is...

5 a restaurant which specialises in grilled chicken? One of my favourite restaurants is a

B Listen again and complete the extracts below. Then check your place called ..., which specialises
answers in the audio script on page 174. 1. as

1 They've got the very famous sushi that everyone thinks about It's a cheap/basic/smart/expensive ...
when they think of Japanese food, but they’ve got so much else You can get ...
e —# , I'd love to take you to XXX; you'd love it!
2 Hiresbiinta is really for its okonomiyaki. | know a really good ... that | should
3 Tempura is prawns and deep fried in a really light, fluffy take you to.
batter.
4 | lived in Madrid, in Spain for around years on and off. B Work in groups and take turns to
5 The quality of the food is talk about your favourite food city.
6 Tarta de Santiago is a great pastry Have you been to any of these cities?
7 lonce tried pig’s ear, which | have to say was possibly the Do you agree with the other students?
hing I’ve ever tasted. Which city would you like to visit?

119

--- PAGE 119 ---

VOCABULARY

REPORTING VERBS

4 A Match the verbs with the statements.

1 offer a) | can’t eat anything else, thank you.
2 warn —~s b) Would you like a coffee?
3 refuse c) Be careful. It’s hot.

B Look at the statements/questions below. Rewrite each
statement in reported speech using a verb from the box.

warned explained refused promised invited
suggested offered

1 ‘You have to be careful not to eat too much.’

She us not to eat too much.
2 ‘Come to Palermo and I'll take you to my favourite restaurant?”
He us to Palermo, and he to take us to his

favourite restaurant.
3 ‘It will definitely be good value for money. I’m sure of it.’
She that it would be good value for money.
4 ‘| think Lima could be one of the greatest food cities’
She that Lima could be one of the greatest food cities.
5 ‘The restaurant specialises in grilled chicken!’
He that the restaurant specialises in grilled chicken.
6 ‘I don’t believe that there is any better food than in Singapore’
He to believe that there was any better food than in
Singapore.

GRAMMAR

VERB PATTERNS

5 A Look at the verb patterns in bold in sentences a)-e). Then

complete the table below with the sentences.

a) We explained that it was our first trip to the area.
b) He agreed to show us around Palermo.

c) She suggested trying some of the local dishes.
d) They promised to cook for us.

e) He warned us not to eat the chillies.

verb + infinitive with to verb + -ing

She offered to show us around. They recommended taking the
1 bus.

2 3

Verb + object + infinitive with to | verb + that

They invited us to stay. She decided that she would stay.
4 &

B (0) 10.3 WEAK FORMS: to, for, that Listen to the sentences
above and underline the stressed words.

C Listen again and check your answers. Pay attention to the weak

forms of to /ta/, for /fa/ and that /dat/. Then listen and repeat.

D Some verbs use more than one pattern. Find two examples in
Exercise 4B of verbs which can use different patterns.

Agree: She agreed to show us around. They agreed that it was a good

idea.
[> page 146 LANGUAGEBANK

6 Complete the second sentence so that
it means the same as the first. Use the
correct form of the verbs in bold.

1 ‘During the festival, street vendors
sell nothing but chocolate’ explain
She during the festival
street vendors only sell chocolate.

2 ‘People should come to the Tomatina
festival in Spain. suggest/visit
Beatrix Spain during the
Tomatina festival.

3 ‘You shouldn't eat anything before
the cheese-tasting festivals. There
are more than 1,000 cheeses to try.

warn/eat

He us not anything
before going to the cheese-tasting
festivals.

4 ‘We'll definitely go to the Mango
festival in India in July’ promise/take
He me to the Mango festival.

5 ‘Would you like me to show you
around the Eurochocolate festival?’
offer/show
The tour guide us around
the Eurochocolate festival.

? A Read the comments about food
below. Do any of the people have
similar ideas to you?

66 Ilove good food, but I never cook it -
myself. I would rather go toa restaurant.

6 Food isn’t at all important to me.
I just eat when I'm hungry. 99

6 Food is like a passion for me.
Ilove cooking for lots of people. 99

66 People who eat in restaurants are
lazy. It's such a waste of money.

&@ Fast food is the best treat. I love nothing
more than a hamburger and chips. 99

B Work in pairs. Tell your partner how
you feel about food and cooking. What
kinds of food do you like and dislike?
Try to give examples. Take notes.

C Work with another student. Tell
them about your last partner. Together
decide on a meal which would be good
for your previous partner.

D Tell the class about your ideas.

‘Davide suggested having pasta because
you said you loved it. He promised to
make a special seafood sauce for you.’

--- PAGE 120 ---

| DEATH
HOXTON SQUARE

Situated below a

BY BURRITO

ive music venue this is a great

place to eat contemporary Mexican street food
and maybe even enjoy a cocktail. The restaurant
has a great atmosphere if you're young and like

to enjoy a party. T
served on plastic

he food is reasonably priced,
plates with plastic cutlery, but the

burritos and tacos are delicious. Beware if you're on

a diet though. Eve!

nthe smaller dishes of nachos,

guacamole, black
dancing for a whil

beans and chips will keep you
le to burn off those calories.

WRITING

A RESTAURA

NT REVIEW; LEARN

TO LINK IDEAS

‘| SUPER
TUSCAN WINE BAR
AND KITCHEN
SPITALFIELDS

This is a small and friendly wine
bar tucked down a side street
near the market. The décor is
Mediterranean as is the menu.
There's a selection of typically
Tuscan dishes, like lentil or
bean soup and bruschetta with
porcini mushrooms, as well as
all the usual pizza and pasta
dishes. The food is cooked
simply and tastes great, and
there is such an authentic
Italian atmosphere. This is a
good place to meet up with
friends and enjoy a glass of
wine and an antipasto, although
you'll probably find quite a few
cities bankers doing that too.

|O! Back IN
5 MINUTES
BRICK LANE

You wouldn't find this restaurant
unless you were looking. It's
hidden behind a clothes shop.
Walk through the shop and

open a curtain at the back. It

will take you down some stairs
and into the 1970s-style dining
room. Open from Wednesdays
to Saturdays only, you can
choose from a selection of three
starters, three main courses and
three desserts. While the food

is seasonal and elegant, it isn’t
cheap. However, the atmosphere
is so cosy and welcoming that
you could easily forget you're

in a restaurant at all. You feel

as if you've been invited into
someone's house for dinner.

9 A Look at the examples and answer questions 1-3.

The food was so delicious that | didn’t mind spending more than usual.
It was such an enjoyable meal that | would recommend this restaurant

8 A Match headings a)-e) with
questions 1-5 to complete the guide
to writing a restaurant review.

a) Information about the price

b) Information about the menu

c) Details of the restaurant

d) Information about the service

e) Information about the atmosphere

1 : Where is it? How can you
contact them? How do you get
there? What are the opening hours?

2 : What's the décor like? Is
it child-friendly? Is it noisy? Is it
romantic?

3 : What kind of food does it
serve? Are there any specialities?
Do they serve vegetarian food?

Are there any particular dishes you
recommend?

4 : Are the staff friendly? Do
you have to wait a long time?

5 : Is it good value for money?
How much does it cost per person?
Are there any special offers?

B Read the reviews above. Which
restaurant would you like to visit
and why?

C Try to answer the questions in
Exercise 8A for each restaurant.

to anybody.

It was so expensive that | wouldn't go back there unless | wanted to

impress a client.

Although it's a five-star restaurant, the service was appalling.

While the staff are friendly, and the atmosphere is fun, the food isn’t

anything special.

1 Which linking words do we use to connect ideas which contrast
with each other?

2 Which do we use to talk about the consequences of a situation?

3 Which do we use to suggest a condition?

B Read the reviews in Exercise 8B again. Find and underline the
linking words.

C write sentences to connect the five pairs of ideas below. Use

the words in brackets to help.

1 Starbucks has been very successful. Now they want to open new
stores in China. (so)

2 The restaurant has had very bad reviews. Nobody wants to go
there. (such)

3 The food was very bad. | will only go back there again if they get
a new chef. (unless)

4 The food was delicious. The service was poor. (although)

5 The restaurant had a good atmosphere. The food was
disappointing. (while)

10 Choose a restaurant in your town/city (or invent a restaurant).
Write a short review (80-100 words). Use the guide in Exercise 8A
to help you. Use the linking words in Exercise 9B to connect your
ideas.

--- PAGE 121 ---

10.3)) WHEN YOU TRAVEL. ...

F ) giving advice/warnings
(Pp) individual sounds: vowels

(Vv) airports

VOCABULARY

AIRPORTS

1 A Discuss the questions.
1 Do you ever travel by plane?
2 Do you enjoy it?
3 What do you like/dislike about air travel?
4 Which part of the airport can you see in the picture?

B Complete the questions/statements you might
hear in an airport with the words in the box.

proceed aisle card passport priority X-ray
hand gate check boards

1 Can! see your ?
2 Your number is forty-two.
3 Ina few moments we will be calling all passengers
with boarding.
4 Would you like an seat or a window seat?
Your flight at 9.30.
6 Please have your boarding ready for
inspection.
7 How many bags do you have to in?
8 Do you have any luggage?
9 Please to gate number thirty.
10 Put your hand luggage through the
machine.
C (6) 10.4) inpivipuat sounns: vowels Put the
words in Exercise 1B next to the matching vowel
sound. Listen again and check your answers.
/i:/ (leave) /a:/ (car) /3:/ door) — /o/ (not)
/at/ (drive) /et/ (plane) /e/ (exit) /e/ (bag)

D Put the phrases in the order you might hear them
in an airport. Where would you hear each phrase?

uw

2 A Work in pairs. Write a list of three things you

must and mustn’t do in an airport.
B Read the article below. Does it mention your ideas?

C Work in pairs and discuss. Do you agree with the
advice? Have you ever experienced any of these
problems?

D Can you find any words in the text to add to each
phoneme group in Exercise 1C?

Seven things you should
NEVER do in an airport

1 Take too much luggage: If the airline says only take
one bag of hand luggage, that's what it means. No extra
shopping bags allowed.

2 Go to the wrong terminal: Don't wait until your
taxi has left you and driven away before checking which
airport terminal your flight leaves from.

3 Make jokes about bombs or drugs: The customs
officers might not have a very good sense of humour, and
you might be arrested.

4 Take too many liquids: You're only allowed 100ml so
don't take extra bottles of shampoo and suncream.

5 Waste people’s time: Get ready for the x-ray
machine. Make sure you take your laptop out of your
bag, find your phone and take off your belt so you don't
keep everybody waiting.

6 Forget things in the trays: Don't wait until you
board the aeroplane before realising you left your keys,
wallet and passport in the tray.

7 Sleep: Flying is exhausting, but don't close your eyes.
If you're travelling alone, you might wake up to find you
missed your flight.

--- PAGE 122 ---

FUNCTION i LEARN TO

GIVING ADVICE/WARNINGS MAKE GENERALISATIONS

3 A fb) 10.5 Listen and match conversations 1-4 6 A Look at how the speakers make generalisations.

with situations a)-d).

a) crime ina city

b) the journey to Heathrow airport

c) travelling in the north of the country
d) arriving at the airport

B Listen again. What problems do they talk about
in each conversation?

4 A Match 1-10 with a)-j) to complete the
warnings/advice.

Watch out for

Make sure

Don't ... (or else)

You'd better

If | were you,

Be careful

Don't forget to

Whatever you do,

You need to

The most important thing is

OANA UU RWN eB

ry
o

a) when you take trips into the jungle.

b) you find out how much the journey is supposed
to cost.

c) watch out for groups of young children on the
streets.

d) the taxi drivers who tend to hang around outside
the airport.

e) I'd allow about an hour and a half.

f) don’t drink the water.

Cross out the alternative which is not possible.

1 Watch out for the taxi drivers who tend to/are tend
to/have a tendency to hang around outside the
airport.

2 You'd better leave plenty of time, because often/
never/usually there are delays on the tube.

3 Be careful when you take trips into the jungle.
Sometimes/Generally/Always there are a lot of
mosquitoes there, so remember to take mosquito
nets and insect cream.

4 On the whole/It doesn’t often happen/It’s not very
common, but don’t walk around the city obviously
carrying money in a big money belt or anything.

5 There isn’t really much crime. On the whole/For the
whole/Generally, it’s a pretty safe city.

B 1) 107 Listen and underline the words or
phrases the speakers use.

? Look at the sentences below. Then make

generalisations using the prompts in brackets.

1 | usually travel by train. (tend)

| tend to travel by train.

2 | hate sitting around in airports. (whole)

3 The beaches are clean and safe. (generally)

4 The trains to the airport are sometimes delayed.
(not common)

5 Criminals target tourists. (tendency)

6 English people complain about the weather. (often)

8 A Workin pairs and role-play the situation.

g) leave plenty of time.
h) get in until you've agreed the price with the driver,
or else you could ...

i) to remember to hold on to your handbag.
j) take your malaria tablets.

B [B) 10.6 Listen and check. Then listen and
repeat the phrases. Which words are stressed?

[> page 146 LANGUAGEBANK

5 Find and correct the mistakes. There is one mistake

in each sentence.

1 The most important thing to remember is not
going out alone.

2 If! were you I'll bring waterproof clothes.

3 Make sure if you wear a helmet and protective
clothing when you ride a bike.

4 Be carefully when you're on the main roads.
They’re always very busy.

5 Don't forgetting to keep your luggage with you at
all times.

6 Whatever you are do, don’t buy food from the
street sellers. It’s terrible.

7 Watch out for people try to sell you fake watches.

8 You'll better leave your valuables in the hotel.

Student A: read the instructions below. Student B:
turn to page 163.

Student A: you are a tourist. You want to go on

a tour in the Australian Outback. Ask the Tourist
Information for advice, e.g. Are there any animals to
be careful of? What special clothes/equipment do
you need?

I'd like some information about going into the Outback.
First of all, what animals do | need to be careful of? ...

B Change roles and role-play the situation.

Student B turn to page 163.

Student A: you work ina diving centre.

A customer would like to go snorkelling on the reef.

Give him/her some advice using the phrases in

Exercise 4A and the prompts below:

1 Wear a T-shirt so you don’t get sunburn. Suncream
washes off in the sea.

2 Don't touch the coral. You might break pieces off.

Stingrays can give you a nasty sting.

4 There are strong currents. Need to be able to swim
to the shore or the boat.

5 Take an underwater camera for photos.

w

--- PAGE 123 ---

10.40)) THE GREAT MELT

DVD PREVIEW DVD VIEW

LL Read about the BBC documentary. Why do you 2 Watch the programme and answer the questions.
think life gets difficult for the polar bears? 1 Why is the melting ice a problem for the polar
bears?

2 Is the problem worse than it was in the past?

Nature’s Great Events: [J]8/c) 7 P

The Great Melt 3A Complete the sentences using the words in the
box below.

This BBC nature documentary shows how 1

life changes when the Arctic ice melts in the ice flicker rises drown summer sea _islands

summer. This is the greatest seasonal change

‘ ‘ 1 The Northern Lights across the sky.
on the planet. During the long winter, the sun 2 Polar bears are busy, hunting for seals on the
never rises, and temperatures plummet to minus frozen
40 degrees. When the ice melts in the summer, 3 In February, the sun for the first time in

the landscape changes completely and life gets

four months.
difficult for the polar bears.

4 At the height of , even the permanent
ice caps are touched by the power of the sun.

5 Over7 million square kilometres of ice has melted
away, creating thousands of , surrounded
by open ocean.

6 A mother bear and her cub rest on a small piece

of sea
7 If future ice melts are as extreme as this one,
bears like these may starve or , lost at sea.

B Watch the programme again to check your
answers.

4 Work in groups and discuss.
1 Do you think man can do anything to improve the
situation? What?
2 Do you think television programmes like this help
to change the situation? How?

--- PAGE 124 ---

HHS 10.4

speakout an endangered place writeback email for action
5 AD)108) Youare going to give short presentations about ? A Read the email and answer the

‘Places to see before they disappear’. First, listen to someone else’s questions. Where is Little Green
presentation. Which question below does he not answer? Street? What is the problem?
1 What is the place?
2 Why is itin danger?
3 Why should you go there/see it? Little Green Street is an old cobbled
4 How much does it cost to go there? street just outside the centre of London.
5 What can be done to change the situation? tis only 2.5 metres wide, and the houses

here were built more than 225 years ago.
The street, with its pretty, painted houses,

[CS /PHRASES and cobblestones, survived World War

|. But now it is under threat from a

B Listen again and tick the key phrases you hear.

One of the most beautiful places ... [is under threat] developer who plans to build a car park
One of the most endangered places is/has ... and houses on the land near to it. The
One of the biggest problems ... houses on Little Green St are protected
Something that everyone should have the chance to see is ... by law (nobody can get permission to

demolish them), but the street itself is
not. In order to build his car park the
developer plans to send heavy work

The problem is that ...
Fortunately/Unfortunately, ...

Interestingly/Hopefully, ... lorries and machinery up and down

Many/Much of the ... have/has been this little old street. We are in no doubt
We have an opportunity to ... that the lorries would destroy the street,
In the past, ... but now... and possibly the houses along with it. If

you would like to join us in our protest
against these plans, please sign your
name at the bottom of the email.
6 A Workon your own and plan a three-minute presentation. Thank you.

Do some research if necessary. Use the prompts below and the

key phrases to help.

¢ Whatisthe place? + Why should you go there/see it?
* Whyisitindanger? + What can be done to change the situation?

... before it’s too late.

B Write an email calling for action to
protect one of the places presented

B Work in pairs and take turns. in Exercise 6. Use the email above and
Student A: practise your presentation. Use your notes, but try not the key phrases to help.

to read all the information. Try to look up when you're talking.
Student B: help your partner improve their presentation. Time the
presentation. Was it long enough? Give him/her feedback about his/her
style and language.

Then change roles, and practise your presentations again.

C Give your presentation to the whole class. Watch the other
students’ presentations. Which places would you like to visit?

--- PAGE 125 ---

10.5(( LOOKBACK

@ THE ENVIRONMENT

1A Complete the words/phrases in bold with the
missing letters.
1 lonlyeato___ c food because it’s grown
without using chemicals.

2 |buyp_-r__ d food because | don’t have
time for cooking.

3 Idon'tusee___g_-s_____g light bulbs
because they're expensive.

4 My house isn’t in__l___d very well, so it’s
always cold in the winter.

5 |trytor__y___ glass, plastic and paper, but
nothing else.

6 I'm careful to turn the computer and TV off at
night, and not leave themo_s___d__

7 |buyalotofs____dh___ clothes -1 like them
and they’re cheap.

8 | think p____ ss__ food is great because you

can always make a quick meal at home.

B Write two statements that are true for you using
the words/phrases in bold. Compare your sentences
with a partner.

© REPORTED SPEECH i

2 Rewrite the reported conversation using direct
speech.

Samantha introduced me (Franco) to Tom who said

he was pleased to meet me. I replied that it was a
pleasure to meet him, too, and that I hoped Tom was
enjoying his stay in Milan. He said he thought Milan
was a beautiful city, and he had very much enjoyed
his stay there. He said that he had met lots of
wonderful people and eaten some delicious food.

I asked Tom if he had had the chance to do any
sightseeing. Tom told me that unfortunately he hadn’t
had very much time at all, but that he had enjoyed
seeing the cathedral. I asked Tom if he planned to
visit Italy again soon. He replied that he would have
loved to, but that Italy was a long way from
Queensland. I said that was true, and then invited
Tom to come and join us for a coffee before he had to
leave for the airport. Tom accepted.

Samantha: Franco, this is Tom.
Tom: Pleased to meet you, Franco.
Franco: It’s ...

3 A Workin pairs. Take turns to ask and answer
questions 1-5. Make a note of your partner's answers.
1 What are your plans for your next holiday?
2 Where did you grow up? Is it different there now?
3 What do you usually do on a Saturday afternoon?
4 What are you going to do later?
5 What two promises can you make concerning your

English studies?

B Work with another student. Tell them what you
learnt about your partner using reported speech.

@ REPORTING VERBS

4 student A: choose a word. Don’t say the word, but say
something in the manner of the word. Student B: listen
and guess which word your partner is describing.

explain refuse promise warn invite
suggest offer

A: If you do that again, I’m leaving.
B: warn?

© VERB PATTERNS

5 A Circle the correct alternative.
1 He promised to give/giving me back the money.
2 | refused to answer/answering.
3 She invited us to stay/for staying.
4 He's offered pay/to pay.
5 | agreed it to be/that it was the best thing to do.
6 They explained wanting/that they wanted our address.
B Work in pairs and discuss. When was the last time:
* you promised to do something?
* you agreed with someone's idea?
* someone explained something to you?
* you warned someone about something?
* someone offered to do something for you?

@ GIVING ADVICE/WARNINGS

6A Complete the advice/warnings using the words in
brackets to help.

1 , don’t tell the teacher. (whatever)

2 buy a phrase book. (forget)

3 you get fit before you do it. (make)

4 wear that old shirt, _ you'll never get the
job. (else)

5 If , 'd buy her some flowers. (were)

6 you don’t oversleep and miss the plane.
(careful)

7 You look for a hotel on the internet (better)

8 ask your manager who can approve it. (need)

B Match the advice/warnings above with a)-h).

a) | haven't done my homework.

b) | forgot my mother’s birthday.

¢) | arrive in New York late at night. | don’t know where
I’m going to stay.

d) My plane leaves at 6a.m., but | don’t have an alarm.

e) I'd like to have a holiday but I’m not sure who | have
to get permission from.

f) I’m planning to run a marathon, but | haven't done
any training.

g) | can’t speak the language.

h) I’ve got a job interview, but | don’t have any clean
clothes to wear.

C Work in pairs. Give each other advice using

a-h above.

--- PAGE 126 ---

Verb
be
beat
become
begin
bend
bet
bite
bleed
blow
break
bring
broadcast
build
burn
burst
buy
catch
choose
come
cost
cut
deal
dig
do
draw
dream
drink
drive
eat
fall
feel
feed
fight
find
fly
forbid
forget
forgive
freeze
get
give
go
grow
hang
have
hear
hide
hit
hold
hurt
keep
know

lay
lead
leap
learn

Past simple
was
beat
became
began
bent
bet

bit

bled
blew
broke
brought
broadcast
built
burned/burnt
burst
bought
caught
chose
came
cost

cut
dealt
dig

did
drew
dreamed/dreamt
drank
drove
ate

fell

felt

fed
fought
found
flew
forbade
forgot
forgave
froze
got
gave
went
grew
hung
had
heard
hid

hit

held
hurt
kept
knew
laid

led
leapt
learned/learnt

IRREGULAR VERBS

Past participle
been
beaten
become
begun
bent

bet

bitten
bled
blown
broken
brought
broadcast
built
burned/burnt
burst
bought
caught
chosen
come
cost

cut

dealt

dug

done
drawn
dreamed/dreamt
drunk
driven
eaten
allen

elt

ed

ought
ound
flown
forbidden
orgotten
orgiven
rozen
got

given
gone
grown
hung
had
heard
hidden
hit

held

hurt

kept
known
laid

led

leapt
learned/learnt

Verb
leave
lend
let

lie
light
lose
make
mean
meet
mistake
pay
put
read /ri:d/
ride
ring
rise
run
say
see
sell
send
set
hake
hine
hoot
how
hrink

S|
q
|
g
aI
shut
S|
S|
|
S|
SJ

understand
wake

wear

win

write

Past simple
left

lent

let

lay

lit

lost
made
meant
met
mistook
paid

put
read /red/
rode
rang
rose

ran

said

saw
sold
sent

set
shook
shone
shot
showed
shrank
shut
sang
sank
sat
slept
slid
smelled/smelt
spoke
spelt
spent
spilled/spilt
split
spread
stood
stole
stuck
stung
swam
took
taught
tore
told
thought
threw
understood
woke
wore
won
wrote

Past participle
left

lent

let

lain

lit

lost
made
meant
met
mistaken
paid

put

read /red/
ridden
rung
risen

run

said

seen
sold

sent

set
shaken
shone
shot
shown
shrunk
shut
sung
sunk

sat

slept

slid
smelled/smelt
spoken
spelt
spent
spilled/spilt
split
spread
stood
stolen
stuck
stung
swum
taken
taught
torn

told
thought
thrown
understood
woken
worn
won
written

--- PAGE 127 ---

LANGUAGE BANK

GRAMMAR

12)

question forms

object questions
Object questions use the word order: question word +
auxiliary verb + subject + infinitive.

question word | auxiliary verb | subject | verb
Where do you work?
What did she say?
When are they coming?

yes/no questions
Yes/No questions don’t use a question word. The answer
to the question is Yes or No.

auxiliary verb | subject | verb

smoke?
win?
arrived?

Does he
Did we
Have they

review of verb tenses

present simple

+ | He looks happy.

- | He doesn’t look happy.

? | Does he look happy?

Use the present simple to talk about something that is
always or generally true, habits, routines, with be and
other state verbs (see below).

present continuous

+ | We're staying here.

- | We aren't staying here.

? | Are we staying here?

Use the present continuous to talk about an activity
happening at the time of speaking or a temporary activity
happening around now. It may be happening at the
moment, but maybe not.

past simple

+ | They worked hard.
- | They didn’t work hard.
? | Did they work hard?

Use the past simple to talk about finished actions, events
or situations in the past.

talking about yourself

subject questions

When the wh- question word is the subject of the question:
+ we don't use an auxiliary verb (do, did, etc.).

* we use the same word order as in an affirmative sentence.

question word | verb object

Who wants ice cream?
What happened?

Who ate the cheese?

questions with prepositions

When we use a verb + preposition expression (but not
multi-word verbs) such as look for, depend on, write about,
etc., we usually keep the verb and preposition together:
What did you talk about? Who are you looking for?

In very formal English we sometimes move the
preposition to the front of the sentence. Compare:

What does it depend on? Onwhat does it depend?

past continuous

+ | was living there during the 90s.
- | | wasn’t living there during the 90s.
? | Were you living there?

Use the past continuous to talk about an action or
situation in progress at a particular time in the past.
This action was not finished at that time.

state verbs and dynamic verbs

State verbs are not usually used in the continuous form.

The most common state verbs are:

* attitude verbs: love, hate, like, want, prefer

+ thinking verbs: believe, know, remember, understand,
mean, imagine

* sense verbs: see, hear, sound, appear, seem

* belonging verbs: own, possess, belong to, have, contain,
include

Some state verbs can be used in the continuous form

when they describe actions, e.g. see, have, think:

I'm seeing Phil tonight. (see = meet)

We're having a party. (have = organise)

I'm thinking of going to university. (think = consider)

introducing a question

introducing an opinion

Could | ask a question?

There are a couple of things I'd like to ask about.
Can | ask you about that?

| have a query.

For me (the most important thing is) ...
I'd have to say ...

In my opinion, ...

One thing I'd like to say is that ...

--- PAGE 128 ---

PRACTICE

A Write questions for the answers in italics.
1 Where

| live in Madrid.
2 Who

Nick won the game.
3 Does

No, he doesn’t eat meat.
4 What

They are sleeping.
5 What

I'm writing about my first holiday.
6 When

We arrived yesterday.
7 Who

We ate the chocolate.
8 Did

Yes, we liked the film.

A Underline the correct alternatives.

‘Like most translators, | !’m speaking/speak several
languages. At the moment, | *’m attending/attend a
conference. | >was doing/did some work for an internet
company when | ‘was hearing/heard about this

conference. | >was arriving/arrived three days ago and
I'm going to stay until Monday, when it ends’

My best friend is called Gina. We Saren’t speaking/don’t
speak to each other every day, but we’re very close.

| ‘was meeting/met her on my first morning at university.
| was looking/looked for the library when she came up
to me and asked, ‘Excuse me, °do you know/

are you knowing where the library is?’ We ‘were finding/
found it together!

B Put the words in brackets in the correct places to
make questions.

1

the President? (killed, who)

were you thinking? (what, about)

to the old theatre? (happened, what)

Where your great-grandparents come? (from, did)

your ancestors from here? (come, did)

she here for a long time? (worked, has)

is all that noise? (who, making)

house you looking for? (are, which)

B Put the verbs in brackets into the correct tense.

1

5

6

Sit down and watch the game! We (win)
2-1. Ronaldo scored two minutes ago.

John wasn't here last summer. He (travel)
around Africa.

Fifty years ago, my favourite writer (die).

| didn’t do the homework because |

(not listen) when the teacher told us what to do.

DVDs (not work) very well on my laptop,
so | use the TV and DVD player.

What's that smell? Can you turn off the oven? | think

the food (burn).

(see) that film last night? What did you
think?
Everyone knows that smoking (cause)
cancer.

A Find and correct the mistakes in the conversation below. There are six mistakes.

A: There are a couple of things I'd like ask about.

B: Go ahead.

A: Firstly, which of your films do you think is the best?
B:

: I'd having to say Millennium Dreamer. For me, it’s my best film and it was my

first comedy.

D>

silent type in real life?

B: No. One of thing I'd like to say is that these images are invented by the media.
By my opinion, good actors are never just one thing. That's why they’re actors.

Can | ask you around that? You've never done comedy before. Why not?
: | don’t know. | suppose people think I’m a serious actor.
A: Could | ask question about your image? Is it accurate? Are you really the strong

--- PAGE 129 ---

2

LANGUAGE BANK

GRAMMAR

B

present perfect and past simple

Present perfect simple: have/has + past participle (lived, worked, seen etc.)

+ I've been to Poland a few times.

- | He hasn’t worked here before.

? | Have you bought a new car?

For irregular past participles see the list of irregular verbs on page 127.

time up to now

Use the present perfect for actions which have happened in your life before
now. These are often general experiences. It isn’t important exactly when
these things happened. Conversations which begin like this in the present
perfect usually continue in the past simple as the speaker adds details:
I've been to Colombia. Really? Where did you go?

He’s played in an Indie band. What were they called?

We often use the adverbs ever and never with the present perfect:

We’ve never been to China. Have you ever been to the Opera?

narrative tenses

past simple

Use the past simple for states and actions in the past. We often specify
the time when they happened:

| left university in 1996. He didn’t know the way to Sal's house.

past continuous
Use the past continuous to talk about the background information for
a story. Use the past simple to talk about the main events.

BACKGROUND INFORMATION
past continuous

| was walking through the park ...
The sun was shining ...

The birds were singing ...

past Ma eeeEOEOOEOOOEOOOEO~S NOW

As | was walking through the park, the sun was shining and the birds

were singing. Suddenly, | heard a loud noise.

Often the past continuous action is interrupted by another action

(in the past simple):

| was having a bath when the phone rang.

We can use conjunctions like as and while to talk about two actions
which were happening at the same time:

While | was reading the paper, | watched the women buying vegetables

in the market.

For more information on state and dynamic verbs section 1.2, page 128.

MAIN EVENT
past simple

WHEN ... [heard a noise

recent events

Use the present perfect to talk about events
which happened a short time ago. We often
use the adverbs just, yet and already:

I've just finished his book. It was brilliant.
We've already eaten.

Have you done your homework yet?

We've seen a lot of Jude recently.

present perfect or past simple?

Use the past simple to talk about a specific
event which happened at a specific time:
I've been to Sweden.

(At some time in my life up to now. We don’t
know when.)

We went to Stockholm in 2002.

NOT We've-beerte Steckhotatin 2062,

(This is a specific occasion and date, so we
use the past simple.)

past perfect

+

| had finished my work.
- | They hadn’t had time.
Had they been there before?

~_

Use the past perfect to make it clear that
one action happened before the other.

past perfect past simple
I lost my wallet. | didn’t have any money,

past =| now

| didn’t have any money because | had lost

my wallet.

When before or after is used in the sentence,
it's already clear which action comes before
the other, so we can use the past simple
instead of the past perfect:

She had lived in London for five years before
she moved to New York.

She lived in London for five years before she
moved to New York.

We often use the past perfect with ‘thinking
verbs like remember, realise, think, discover,
find out, etc.:

When | got to the school, | realised I'd left my
books at home.

present

,

telling a story
beginning the This happened when ... questions to keep | So, what happened? What did you do?
story In the beginning, ... a story going What happened next? Really?
Heceribin Well,.... Anyway,... Before long, ... | don't believe it! Oh no./ Oh dear.
whee in) aa So,... And then, all of a sudden ... responses to How embarrassing!
DD The next thing | knew, ... show interest That's really funny.
ending the story | Intheend,... Finally, ... You must be joking. Yes, | know.

--- PAGE 130 ---

PRACTICE

A Tick the correct sentences, a) or b).

1 a) I've been to India last year.
b) | went to India last year.
2 a) | finished my studies in 2005.
b) I've finished my studies in 2005.
3 a) Did you have lunch yet?
b) Have you had lunch yet?
4 a) Did you ever see Metallica play live?
b) Have you ever seen Metallica play live?
5 a) Is this the first time you've tried judo?
b) Is this the first time you tried judo?
6 a) It’s the most beautiful place I’ve ever been to.
b) It's the most beautiful place | ever went to.

A Underline the correct alternatives to complete
the story.

| remember when Marvin Gaye 'died/had died.

| ?had been/was going to one of his concerts a few
months before. In fact, he *hadn’t played/wasn't playing
very well and | was disappointed. | also remember when
JFK was shot. | *had lived/was living with my parents in
New York and | °studied/was studying at the time.

| remember the cleaning lady *came/was coming into the
room, and said to me, ‘Hey, President Lincoln has been
shot. | 'replied/was replying, ‘| know that.’ ‘No,’ she said.
‘President Lincoln has been shot!’ So | said, ‘What do
you mean?’ And she said, ‘Oh no, | mean ... President,
you know, what's his name, the one now. President
Kennedy's been shot.’ So then | was turning/turned on
the radio.

B Use the prompts to make short conversations.
1 A: you / be / here / before? (ever)

B: no / not
2 A: you /see/ the film The Reader?
B: no / not / see (yet)
3 A: he/be/ to Budapest?
B: yes / go / last summer
4 A: you/ finish / that book? (yet)
B: yes / start / the next one (already)
5 A: you / see / Maria?
B: yes, she / leave / a message for you
6 A: he/ decide / what job / want to do? (yet)
B: no / have / not

B Find and correct the mistakes. One sentence is

correct.

1 | was leaving the room when | had heard someone
shouting. had left

2 | couldn’t open the door because | teft my keys at
home...

3 Weegee thfough the tunnel when the gar broke down.

4 As soon as the film started I realised I'seen it before.

5 |'feVer been to Egypt before, so | was really excited to
see the pyramids.

6 By the time we arrived at the party, everybody else is
leaving.

7 We had waited for nearly an hour before the waiter
ropa qu RIag

8 | Baked through some old photographs when | found
this one of you.

A Complete the conversation with the words and phrases in the box.

So, what happened Well

Intheend don’t believe it The next thing! knew this happened when
really funny Anyway You must be joking So

A: Well, ? | was working in a
photographic store.

B: 2 ?

A: 3 , one day a woman came

in and asked if we could fix the problem she had with a
photograph. * | asked her
what the problem was.

B: OK.

A: ° , she had taken this old
photo out of her bag which showed an old man sitting
behind a cow, milking it. © ji
when | asked her what she wanted us to do to the
photo, she said, ‘Can you move the cow?’ ‘Move the
cow?’ | asked. ‘Yes,’ she replied. ‘I want to see what
my grandfather looked like’ She pointed to the feet
sticking out from under the cow.

B: Oh no.” .

A: No, seriously. She wanted us to move the cow,
so that she could see her grandfather's face.

B: 18 !So, what
happened next?

‘A? , when | told her
we couldn't do it, she got quite angry, and left
the shop saying, ‘Then I'll have to take it to
someone else.’

B: That's 7°

131

--- PAGE 131 ---

3

LANGUAGE BANK

GRAMMAR

the future (plans)
be going to

+ | I'm going to start university next year.

- | He isn’t going to get a job this year.

? | Where are you going to stay?

When using be going to use the word order: subject + am/are/is + going to +
infinitive without to. Use be going to to talk about future plans or intentions.
When the verb is go or come, we often use the present continuous:
We're going to (go to) Spain. We're going to Spain.

I'm going to come and see you later. I'm coming to see you later.

present continuous

+ | I'm starting my course in September.

- | We're not going away for very long.

? | What time are you leaving in the morning?

The present continuous is formed: subject + am/are/is (not) + verb + -ing.
Use the present continuous to talk about future plans, when arrangements
have already been made. We usually specify a future time such as next week,
on Friday, etc., unless it is already clear that we are talking about the future:
We're flying to Greece on Friday. (We've already bought the tickets.)

She's staying in a hotel near the airport. (The hotel is already booked.)

In some cases it doesn’t matter if it's the present continuous or be going to:
I'm playing football on Saturday.

I'm going to play football on Saturday.

the future (predictions)

will this year.

Use will to make predictions:
Smartphones will organise our lives.
She's so talented that I’m sure she'll

use it with be going to:

become cheaper.

The dollar will probably get stronger
Probably comes after to be when we

E-readers are probably going to

will

oo

We'll meet you at the station.

- | | won't see you tomorrow.

~_

Will you want a taxi?

When there is no plan or arrangement (when
we make a decision at the time of speaking),
we often use will: I'm tired. | think Ill go to bed.
(subject + will + infinitive)

For use of be going to and will for prediction,
see section 3.2 below.

might

ay

| might go out later.

We might not be able to finish all this
work tomorrow.

Use might + infinitive without to to talk about
plans, when we are unsure what the plan is:
| might stay at home and watch a DVD.

(But I’m not sure. | might go out.)

spoken grammar

We do not usually use might + infinitive
without to in the question form. It seems
old-fashioned and formal:

Do you think you might see Evelyn?

NOT Might-yeuseefretyn2

Global warming could destroy large
parts of Asia in the next thirty years.

be likely to

Use be likely to to make predictions when
something is probable. The negative
is be unlikely to or not be likely to:

become famous.

We often use / think and | hope with will:
| think John will become a doctor.

She hopes she will work in the theatre.
be going to

Use be going to to make predictions
when there is present evidence:

We only have two cars. It’s going to be
difficult to take eleven people tomorrow.
We use probably to make the
prediction less certain. Probably
usually comes after will:

may and might

Use may or might to make predictions
which are less certain. The negative
forms are may not and might not:
Some of our workers may lose their
Jobs because of the restructuring.

We might not go away this year
because we don't have any money.
could

Use could to make predictions which
are less certain:

dealing with misunderstandings

Regina is likely to be late because she
works until seven.

We're unlikely to reach Paris before
lunch because of all the traffic.

Are you likely to be hungry later?
Likely/Unlikely are adjectives:

Will we start at 5.00? It’s unlikely.

spoken grammar

Might is more common than may in
spoken English.

May is a little bit more formal.

saying you didn’t hear something

| didn’t catch any of that.

saying you don’t understand someone's opinion

You've lost me.

| don’t get what you're saying.

asking someone to explain something more clearly

What exactly do you mean?

Do you mean to say ...?

asking someone to repeat something

Can you say that again?

Could you repeat the last part/name/thing you said?

--- PAGE 132 ---

PRACTICE

A Complete the conversation. Use the prompts in
brackets where necessary.

A: Where ! you going?

B: I’m 2 to Paul’s house. We’ ?
going to watch the football.

A: OK. Who 4 ? (play)

B: Real Madrid versus Barcelona.

A: | see. And what time are you ° home?
(come)

B: | don’t know.

A: How ° getting home?

B: I’m not sure. |? his dad to drive me
home, or | & catch the bus. (ask/might)

A Rewrite the sentences below using the words in
brackets.
1 We probably won't win the cup this year. (might)
We
2 | may be late. (likely)
I'm
3 That company will close in July. (going)
That company
4 He probably won't call after 10.00. (unlikely)
He
5 I’m not going to give up exercise. (won't)
|
6 We might have a problem with the flight. (may)
There
7 She'll get angry when she sees this. (going)
She
8 Are you going to visit us? (will)

9 | would love it if he comes to the party. (hope)

10 It is thought prices will rise if they complete the
development. (could)
Prices

A Match 1-7 with a)-g) to make sentences and questions.

1 Ididn’t catch a) you're saying.
2 You've lost b) you mean?

3 | don’t get what c) that again?

4 What exactly do d) tosay...?

5 Could you repeat the e) any of that.

6 Doyou mean f) last name?

7 Can you say g) me.

B Find and correct the mistakes. There is one mistake in

each sentence.

1 Will you going out this weekend?

2 I'm sorry | can’t come. | playing tennis after work.

3 | don't feel very well. | think | stay at home.

4 What you going to do?

5 We go fora picnic, so | hope it doesn’t rain.

6 Is that the phone? Don’t worry - I’m going to get it.

7 They might going to a concert.

8 I'm sorry we can’t come, but we going to visit my
mother this weekend.

B Put the pairs of words in the box into the correct
place to complete the sentences.

willbe aren't going won't know might not
likely to mayarrive is going not likely

1 Jenny be able to meet us tonight because she has to
work late.

2 Several of our workers are lose their jobs this year

because of the economic recession.

In twenty years’ time, cars able to fly.

The predicted storm at any moment.

The children to stay with me because I’m busy.

| my exam results until August.

It's that we'll arrive before 6.00 because there are train

delays.

8 Watch out! That painting to fall off the wall!

Now FW

You’re where?
Don’t shush me!

--- PAGE 133 ---

4

LANGUAGE BANK

GRAMMAR

2B.

must, have to, should (obligation)

must, have to

| must get up at 5 tomorrow.
They have to start work early.
We must start on time.

She has to get there early.

You mustn’t do that!

We don’t have to worry.

They mustn't be late.

He doesn’t have to bring anything.

Do |/we/you have to bring ...?
? | (Must you go so early?)*
Does he/she/it have to go?

*Question forms with must are not very common, and sound
quite formal. We usually use Do! have to ...? instead.

Use must and have to to talk about obligations. These
things are necessary or important. Must is often used for
a personal obligation (something we have decided for
ourselves that we must do):

| must give up eating chocolate.

Must is also used in written rules:

All applicants must provide proof of identity.

Have to is used for external obligation:

We have to wear a uniform. (It's a company rule.)

Often you can use must or have to with the same meaning,
but in spoken English have to is more common.

Don't have to and mustn't have different meanings.

used to, would

used to

+ | /You/He/She/ | used to live in France.

~ | It/We/They

? | Did they use to visit?

didn’t use to see my parents.

Use used to to talk about past habits/states, which have often
changed or are not true now. You can also use the past simple.
As a child, | used to love eating sweets.

As a child | ate a lot of sweets.

We can also use would to talk about past habits, but not
to talk about past states.

| would go to the sweet shop every day. (habit)

As a child, | was very happy.

As a child | used to be very happy. (state)

Mustn’t means ‘it is not allowed’. Don’t/Doesn’t have to
means it is not necessary, but you can do it if you want:
You mustn’t smoke cigarettes anywhere in the building.
(It is not permitted and it’s dangerous.)

You don’t have to work after 6. (It's not necessary.)

Must can only be used to talk about present or future
obligation. To talk about a past obligation, use had to:
We had to get up early to catch the plane.

spoken grammar

Have/Has got to means the same as have/has to in the
context of obligation and is used a lot in spoken English:
I've got to get some money from the bank.

She’s got to get another job.

should/shouldn’'t

should see this film.

oy

\/You/He/She/
— | It/We/They

Do you think we should ...?*

shouldn't smoke in the house.

~_

*Should we ... is more formal, and not very common.

Use should to talk about weak obligations (not as strong
as must or have to). Often it is used for things which you
think are a good idea (advice):

You should come to work in smart clothes.

Use shouldn't to talk about things which are not a good idea:
You shouldn't go to bed so late.

Ought to has the same meaning as should, but is not
usually used in the negative or questions:

You ought to call her = You should call her.

Do not use used to to talk about things that happened
only once, or for a specific number of times/length of
time. Use the past simple for this:

My family moved to America last year.

NOT My-famityusec-to-meveteAmeriectast year

We went to Italy twice on holiday.

NOT Wesedte-go-tettaly twice-on hotiday

| studied at university for three years.

NOT iverst

spoken grammar

Never used to is more common in spoken English than
didn’t use to.

We never used to see them, except for during August.

In short answers in spoken English, we often leave out the
verb or phrase after used to.

Do you smoke? No, | used to, but | don’t any more.

NOT As-e-ehitd_-Hweutd be-very- happy (state)
reaching agreement suggestions commenting on other opinions
giving opinions What about ...? That's a good idea. | | don’t) see what you mean.

| suggest we focus on...
| (really) feel that ...

The way | see things, ...

| suggest we think about ...
The way | see it, ...

| think we should think about ...

How about if / Why don't we (call it)...?

That's a good point. | |’'m not sure that | agree,

That's fine by me. | actually.
That's OK by me. I'm not sure that ... isa
Exactly! good idea.

--- PAGE 134 ---

PRACTICE

f you like travelling to exotic

places, perhaps you 'should/

shouldn’t try this job. Helge Zieler
is a mosquito researcher. In order
to study the biting habits of the
mosquito which spreads malaria in
Brazil, Helge *has to/doesn’t have
to sit inside a mosquito net while
hundreds of mosquitoes bite him.
Every time he sees a mosquito land
on his body, he must/have to suck
it into a tube in his mouth, and
then blow it into a container. On
a good evening, Helge can catch
500 mosquitoes in three hours. But
to do this, he receives 3,000 bites
(an average of seventeen bites
per minute for |80 minutes). He
4mustn’t/must forget his anti-malaria
tablets. Once he caught malaria and
it took him two years to recover.

A Cross out the alternative which is

not possible.

1 | used to play/played/play a lot of
tennis when | was younger.

2 After school | would take/used to
take/take the bus home.

3 He never used to play/would play/
played the guitar, but he doesn’t
play any more.

4 | didn’t use to enjoy/didn’t enjoy/
wouldn't enjoy school, but | worked
hard anyway.

5 Tim used to have/would have/had
long hair.

6 | studied/used to study/didn't use to
study French for five years.

: around in a huge truck full of dead
| cats and raccoons. ‘It’s a hard job,’
| she says, ‘because we work very
: long hours. We 8mustn’t/must be
! on call 24 hours a day.’ na h) think about whether you really

A Underline the correct alternative to complete the text. B Match 1-8 with a)-h) to make

sentences.
1 It's a good job but we ...

The worst jobs G RY 2 | love Saturday mornings, because
in the world?

| don’t have to

| think you should

The doctor told me that |

You mustn't

You don’t have to

Francois is very lucky. His father is
very rich, so he

8 | really must

a) have to work hard.

Now HR W

: You Sshouldn’t/don’t have to drive too b) should do more exercise.

i fast on the roads, especially when c) come to work dressed in jeans.
: you're driving in the countryside.

: Why? Because more than 400 million
: animals are killed on the roads every

You have to look smart.
d) doesn’t have to work at all.

: year. Joanne Keene knows, because e) give up smoking. It's not good for
| she Shas to/shouldn’t remove them. my health.

: Car drivers ’don’t have to/must pick f) get up for work. | can stay in bed
1 the animals up, so Joanne drives until 10a.m.

g) send the forms in until September,
but it’s a good idea to send them
early.

want to apply for the job.

B Make sentences with used to or would using the words in brackets.
Sometimes both may be possible.

1 In Ancient Greece, people (think) the world was flat, but
Aristotle thought it was round.

2 Inthe olden days, people (not have) cars, so they rode
horses.

3 people really (enjoy) watching
gladiator fights in Ancient Rome?

4 Inthe sixteenth century, ladies (put) a white powder
containing lead on their faces. It was poisonous.

5 Two hundred years ago, they (not use) anaesthetics to
perform operations.

6 Before iron was invented, soldiers (fight) using bronze
swords, but they weren't very strong and often changed shape in battle.

7 The Romans (make) themselves sick, so that they could
eat more during their huge banquets.

8 Why people (eat) garlic in Ancient

Egypt? It was to cure toothache.

A Using the words in italics, rewrite the second sentence so it has the same meaning as the first.

1 Let's begin. 4 lagree with that idea.
I think we should begin It’s me.
2 | suggest we look at the emails first. 5 From my point of view, it works very well.
Why ? The way things, it works very well.

3 | don’t understand.

6 | agree with what you have just said.

| you mean. That's point.

--- PAGE 135 ---

5 LANGUAGE BANK

GRAMMAR

comparatives and superlatives

one-syllable adjectives and two-syllable adjectives ending in -y

ways of comparing
Here are some common expressions used
for making comparisons: It’s exactly/about

the same as...., It’s very similar to ...,

It's not as ... as:
It's exactly the same as the one we had.

It's very similar to somewhere | stayed.
He’s not as tall as | expected.

It's a lot/much/far more + adjective:
It's far more beautiful than | imagined.

adjective comparative _— superlative notes
cheap cheaper the cheapest | +-er/the +-est
fast faster the fastest
easy easier the easiest -y changes to -i
friendly _| friendlier the friendliest | + -er / the +-est
. . ; adjective ending in *CVC
big bigger the biggest double final consonant
adjective ending in -e,
large larger the largest add <F/ thes «st

It’s a little/a little bit/slightly:
It's slightly smaller than the last flat | lived in.

*CVC - consonant, vowel, consonant

two-syllable and longer adjectives

using superlatives
Here are some common expressions used
with superlatives: by far the most ..., one of

question tags

To make question tags, add auxiliary verb + pronoun at the end of the
question. For a positive sentence, use a negative tag: You play tennis, don’t you?
For a negative sentence use a positive tag: They weren’t here, were they?

Use contractions in the tag, not the full verb: He’s nice, isn’t he? NOT Hesnice-is
nethe? N.B. Use a comma before the question tag and a question mark after it.

SA 7 7 the most ..., the second (third/fourth) most ...
adjective | comparative superlative notes 7 an 7
- It's by far the most delicious meal I’ve
important | more/less the most/least | + more/less ... than, or the evencaten
important than | important most/the least ... ii ss : : F
It's one of the most beautiful places in
irregular adjectives the world.

We often use superlatives with a phrase
adjective comparative _— superlative beginning in the ...:
good better the best She's by far the best student in the class.
bad worse the worst It's one of the tallest buildings in the world.
Far further/farther | the furthest/farthest

Use question tags to check
information that you think is true.
Also use question tags to sound less
direct (a way to sound polite).

If we are sure of the information, the
intonation falls on the question tag:

positive verb + negative tag

negative verb + positive tag

You're coming tomorrow, aren’t you?

present You're twenty, aren’t you?

She doesn’t swim, does she?

(expect the answer ‘yes’)

past

They came back, didn’t they?

You didn’t see Tim, did you?

If we are really not sure, the
intonation rises on the question tag:

present perfect | You've lost it, haven’t you?

He hasn't seen us, has he?

future I'll be back by 10.00, won't

I? | We won't lose, will we?

4
She’s from Europe, isn’t she?
(maybe she isn’t)

polite requests

request

responses

Could you carry this bag for me?
Could you bring your laptop with you?

Yes, of course.
I'm afraid | can’t/
I’m sorry, | can’t.

Could you tell me the way to the hotel?
Could you tell me what time it is?

Yes, | can. It’s ...

Let me have a look.

Do you know what time the shops open?
Do you know how to get there?

I'm not sure.

Would you mind coming a little bit earlier?
Would you mind booking us a table?

Of course not.
OK/Sure.

BI

watch out!

Could you tell me ...? and Do you know ...? are not direct
questions; the word order is the same as for statements:
Could you tell me what time it is?

NOT €ettteLyetttet mewhattine ts?

Do you know what time the shops open?

NOT De-yer-knewwheattime-dethe-sheps-epen?

Would you mind ... + -ing:

Would you mind watering my plants when | go away?
NOT

Would you mind ...? is followed tas a negative response:
Would you mind helping me? No, of course not.

(I'm happy to help you) NOT ¥es-efeetrse:
(| would mind helping you = I’m not happy to help you)

--- PAGE 136 ---

PRACTICE

A Complete the sentences with the comparative or B Rewrite the sentences using the words in bold, so
superlative form of the adjectives in brackets. that they have the same meaning.
1 We usually fly to Italy instead of going in the car, 1 My brother is slightly taller than! am. bit
because it’s quicker _. quick)
2 They had to travel _ farther than they wanted to 2 The journey to the coast took much longer than we
find a hotel. (far) had expected. far
3 When | was a teenager, | was much _ less confident
than | am now. (1 Henn lent) 3 It’s easily the most expensive restaurant I’ve ever
4 He's one of children in the class. been to. by
(naughty)
5 Exams are much __ easier now than they were 4 Your shoes and my shoes are almost the same.
when | was at school. (easy) similar
6 Swedenis bigger than Norway. (big)
7 K2isthe second highest mountain in the 5 People here are much healthier now that they have
world. (high) clean water. lot

8 This book is slightlyMre difficult to understand
than his last book. The plot is very complicated.
(difficult)

9 He used to be a teacher, but he’s decided to become a
firefighter. It’s a much™0Fe dangerousyh, (dangerous)

10 It’s by far the best film I've ever seen. (good)

A Match 1-8 with a)-h) to make tag questions. B Find and correct the mistakes. There is one mistake in
1 Clive was an engineer, a) have they? each question.
2 You're from Ethiopia, b) won't he? 1 You weren't happy, weren't you?
3 Shania isn’t an actress, c) has she? 2 It'll probably rain, doesn't it?
4 They haven't been here before, _—_d) aren't you? 3 She researched her roots, didn’t her?
5 He'll be home soon, e) is she? 4 They always ask tricky questions, they don’t?
6 You work here, f) will they? 5 | take after my dad, doesn’t he?
7 She hasn't met you, g) wasn’t he? 6 You've met Kevin's fiancée, have not you?
8 They won't finish on time, h) don’t you? 7 | put my foot in it yesterday, haven't |?
8 My mentor will give me a hand, he won't?
9 You had a lot on your mind, doesn’t you?

10 Phil and Luke are on holiday, are not they?

A Find the mistakes and correct them. There is an extra word or two in each line.
1 A: Excuse me, could your, hold the door for me?
B: Yes, Teo of course.
2 A: Do you know when the next train ddeg Yoleaves?
B: I'm not OK sure.
A: Would you tamind staying behind after the meeting?
B: [Xg sure. That's fine.

Ww

4 A: Could js pdgsible you tell me what Tim's phone number is?
B: Let me have ata look.

5 A: Would you mind to looking after my bag while | go to the bathroom?
B: No, of course not Mind.

6 A: Could you tell for me the way to the station?
B

" Yes, 3q | can.

137

--- PAGE 137 ---

6

LANGUAGE BANK

GRAMMAR

Bi

real conditionals

When we talk about situations which are always true, or events
which are possible or probable in the future, using if/when, we can
call these ‘real conditionals’. They are also often referred to as zero
(0) conditionals (always true) and first (1) conditionals (possible or
probable in the future).

real conditional (zero)

present simple
it boils.

if/when + | present simple +
If/When | You* heat water to 100° Centigrade,
* Here you is a general subject meaning ‘anyone’ or ‘people in general’.

Use the real conditional (zero) to talk about a general situation, or
something which is always true (a fact):

If plants don’t have water, they die. Ice melts if you heat it.

(You here refers to ‘anyone’, or people generally, not ‘you’ specifically.)
If/When can come at the beginning or in the middle of the sentence:
If I'm not in the office by 8a.m., my boss gets angry.

My boss gets angry if I'm not in the office by 8a.m.

If and when have the same meaning in zero conditional sentences.

In this case if means ‘when this happens’ or ‘every time this happens’:
When I'm feeling stressed, | eat chocolate.

If I'm feeling stressed, | eat chocolate.

real conditional (first)

Use the real conditional (first) to talk about
possible situations in the future and their
consequences. If you are sure about the result,
use will/von't. If you're not sure, use could/might.
We can change the order of the sentence, but if/
when is always followed by the present simple:
If my train arrives on time, I'll meet you at ten
oclock. OR I'll meet you at ten oclock if my train
arrives on time. NOT ifray-train-witberrive-on-time:
In first conditional sentences, if and when have
different meanings. Use if when you are not
sure if the situation will happen:

If | pass my exams, Ill be very happy.

Use when for a situation which you know will
happen: When | pass my exams, I'll have a party.
Unless has the meaning of ‘if not’ or ‘except in
this situation’:

I'll go straight to the restaurant, unless you call
me first. (| will go straight to the restaurant, if
you don’t call me first.)

Note the difference between zero and first
conditional in the sentences below:

If you sit in the sun, you get sunburn.

(Zero conditional for a general situation/fact.
‘You’ means anyone, or people in general.)

If you sit in the sun, you'll get sunburn.

(First conditional for a specific situation.
I'm talking to you (personally) about what will

if/when + | present simple + will/could/might + verb

you give me your 1 '
If phone number, I'll call you when we're ready.
When you go into the kitchen, | you'll see the keys on the table.

happen today.)

hypothetical conditional: present/future

if+ past simple + would clause
| worked longer hours, | | would make more money.
If | he was the President, | he’d make a lot of changes.
we bought the house, | we'd need to sell our car.

Use the hypothetical conditional to talk about an unreal or
imaginary situation and its consequences. In conditional
sentences, the past tense is used to indicate that something is
hypothetical or imaginary.

In spoken English, would is contracted in the positive and
negative form:

I'd be there if! had time. If she had enough food, she’d feed us all.

giving news

Would is not usually contracted in the question form:
If you passed your exam, would you go to university?
Would you help me if | paid you?

Use If | were you ... to give advice:

If | were you, I’d change teams.

Instead of would, we can use could or should:

If you got really fit, you could probably play again.

It is common to use other expressions in the would
clause: would be able to, would need to and would
have to

If | lost my job, I'd need to find another one!

We would have to cancel the game if it rained.

If you bought a larger quantity, we'd be able to offer
you a better deal.

good news I've got some good news (for you).

I'm really pleased to tell you ...

You'll never guess what.

Bad news, I’m afraid.

BEioos I'm afraid I've got some bad news ...

I'm sorry to have to tell you, but ...
There's something I’ve got to tell you.

I'm afraid/Unfortunately, ...

good or bad news You know...? Well,... I've/We've got something to tell you.
" Wow! That's fantastic/great news. Congratulations! You're joking! You lucky thing!
SEIU eo Well done. Have you?/Did you?

responding to bad news — That'sashame. That's terrible/awful. Th

at's really annoying. I’m really sorry to hear that.

--- PAGE 138 ---

PRACTICE

A Complete the sentences with the correct form of the B Underline the correct alternative.
verbs in brackets. 1 You can’t come to the conference unless/if/when
1 Ifl (pass) my exams, my teacher you're invited.
(be) very surprised. 2. I'm not talking to you unless/if/when you calm
2 When we (visit) my mother, she usually down first.
(look after) the children. 3 They'll arrive as soon as dinner is/will be/won't be ready.
3 When Gaby (leave) her job in the 4 They'll cancel the flight if/unless/when the weather
summer, she (worry) about what to is bad.
do next. 5 If you eat all of that chocolate mousse, you ‘Il feel/feel/
4 Ifl (not find) any cheap tickets, we won't feel ill.
__ (not go) to Malta. 6 We'll organise a taxi when we know/will know/
5 Ifyou (not water) plants, they might know what time the concert starts.
Gie). 7 When |seea spider, | always scream/might scream/
6 | (be) surprised if Martha will scream.
(come) to the party. She said she wasn't feeling well. 8 I'll get some money as soon as the bank will open/
7 Ifyou (get) lost, do you usually opens/might open.
(ask) someone for directions?
8 They (not come) unless you

(invite) them.

A Complete the sentences with the correct form of the B Write answers to the questions using the prompts.
verbs in brackets. Use contractions where possible. Use contractions.
1 If|_sell (sell) my house now, it 1 A: Can we walk to the game?
a won'tbe _(not/be) worth very much. B: No. (be/late)
dyour parrents :
ce Yom Parren’ panven $ GSU parents/come) if | If we walked to the game, we'd be late
_organised _ (organise) a party? 2 A:Why doesn’t the team enter the competition?
3 He_won't be (not/be) able to study here B: (it/lose)
if doesn't pass (not/pass) that exam. If the team _ lost, it wouldn't enter the competition
4 |fyou__lost (lose) your passport, ; ; ,
you would need (need) visit the consulate. 3 A: Can | borrow his car?
5 They _would be (be) healthier if B: No. (get/angry) ; ;
they didn't eat (not/eat) so much junk food. If you __borrowed his car, he'd become angry.
6 Ifyou wrote (write) a novel, what 4 A: Why don't we call her now?
would you call_ (call) it? B: No. (we/wake her up)
7 Ifthe students didn'thave _ (not/have) internet If we __ called her now, she'd wake up.
access, they would find (find) it difficult. 5 A: Why can’t we start the project again?
8 We _wouldn't work(not/work) there if the boss B: (waste/money)
_didn't give __ (not/give) us a lot of freedom. If we wasted money, we'd can't start the project again,

9 Where would she live (she/live) if
she has (have) to move to a different country?
10 Ifhe__ can (can) study on Tuesdays,
he won't need_ (not/need) to come on Wednesday.

6 A: Can we extend our holiday?
B: No. (miss/school)
If we missed school, we'd extend our holiday

A Complete the conversations.

1 A: You'll never g_uess_ what. 3 A: There's s I've got to tell you.
B: What? B: What is it?
A: I'm moving to Australia. A: I've decided to leave my job at the university.
B: You're j | B: I'm s to hear that. What's the problem?
A: No, I'm leaving in March. 4 Alma we're going to be late.
B: You | thing. B: Why? What's happened?
2 A: I've passed my exams! A: The flight's been delayed.
B: H you? Congratulations! B: Oh, that’s as . That's really a :
A: Yes, | got the results this morning.

--- PAGE 139 ---

7

LANGUAGE BANK

GRAMMAR

present perfect simple versus continuous

present perfect continuous

hn | ‘ve/have reading a book.
She | ’s/has playing the piano.
7, | been [. ;
- | You | haven't listening to me.

? | Have | you going there for a long time?

Use the present perfect simple or continuous for actions/

activities which started in the past and continue until now:

I've studied German for six years.
I've been studying German for six years.
Often, there is little change in meaning between the two

tenses (especially for verbs such as live, work, teach, study):

I've lived here for years.
I've been living here for years.

present and past ability
modal verbs to talk about ability

present past

+ | cancook. | could run fast.

- | | can’t drive. He couldn’t do maths.

Could you cook when you

? ish?
? | Can you speak Spanish? were younger?

Use the present perfect continuous to emphasise the
length or duration of an activity:

I've been doing yoga for years. (but I’m still not very
good at it)

He's been playing football since he was three.

As with other continuous forms, do not use the present
perfect continuous with state verbs (e.g. love, hate,
enjoy, know, etc.). With these verbs, use the present
perfect simple:

I've known him for ages.

NOT Hre-been-knewing hin forages:

We often use for, since and How long have you ...? with
the present perfect simple and continuous:

How long have you been waiting for?

She's been working here since 2010.

expressions to talk about ability at a particular
moment

We can use be able to to talk about one particular
situation:

We are able to offer you a special discount on the

fridge today.

She didn’t answer her phone so | wasn’t able to speak to her.
Use manage to to show that an action is/was difficult.

We can also use be able to to talk about ability.

present past

Aged three, | was able to

+ | She’s able to write well. read.

Aged two, he wasn’t able

- | He’s not able to drive.
to walk.

Is he able to speak
French?

Were you able to get a
job?

clarifying opinions

giving opinions

The reason | say this is that he didn’t ask our permission.
For me, there are two options here.

In my view, we should stop selling the product.

| do think we should talk to them first.

| must say | agree with Robert.

giving examples

For example, she forgot her keys yesterday.
Let me give you an example: there was a festival last week.
For one thing, | don’t like caviar.

present past
+ | usually manage to We managed to book a
finish my work on time. | great hotel.

| don’t always manage
- | to speak to my parents
every week.

Do you manage to
? | see the grandchildren
regularly?

She didn’t manage to
pass the exam.

Did you manage to finish
washing the dishes?

--- PAGE 140 ---

PRACTICE

possible, choose the present perfect continuous.

A Complete the sentences with the present perfect simple or
continuous form of the verbs in the box. Where both forms are

do sit (not) listen Hate (not) watch MY ee

inal aga read [ive wait

1 I'm tired, |'ve been sitting in boring meetings all day.
a have been studyin

2 They theif exams since five o'clock this morning.
, ; ave been waiting,
3. I’m glad you're here. We ryou all day.
4 | can't listen to jazz.|__ have always hated
as been doing
5 He karate for nearly twenty years.
A Ti P .
6 You avent listened to me. You hawert heard what | said.
7 She's got a new job. Shere een aC nomics at the university
since June.
8 Howlong _ have you __been living in the UK? When did
havent BSsh Vetehing have been reading
91 TV. my book.

10 We haven't known each other for very long.

A Find and correct the mistakes. There are
five mistakes in the text.

Johnny isn’t able make full sentences

B Underline the correct alternative to
complete the sentences.

1 Hi Tariq. | haven't seen/been seeing you
for ages!

2 | have been knowing/known Justin since
we were at school.

3 Yes, we've met/been meeting each other
before.

4 | ve been playing/did played the guitar for
as long as | can remember.

5 My brother has been travelling/
have been travelled around the world for
the last two years.

6 He has always been enjoying/enjoyed
travelling.

7 Excuse me. | ‘ve been waiting/have wait
for this phone call all morning.

8 | have studying/have been studying
Mandarin for more than ten years, and |
still find it difficult.

B Rewrite the sentences using the words in brackets. Write three
words (contractions are one word).
1 She knows how to ride a motorbike.

She can ride

a motorbike. (can)

but he can fe say several words such as
Mama and Dada, which he couldn't a
month ago. He able to understand various

2 I’m not able to play any instruments.
| can't play

any instruments. (can’t)

commands like ‘No!’ and ‘Come here’ and 3 Seyi and Denia couldn't come last night.

They _ weren't able to

come last night. (able)

he recognises his name. He’s becoming
more mobile; yesterday he managed crawl
from the living room to the kitchen. He’s

4 Were you able to take any photos?
Did you manage

to take any photos? (manage)

also getting better with his hands. He can

hold a pen and he sometimes manages to 5 Can you make pizza?

drawing simple pictures.

Are you able

to make pizza? (able)

6 I can usually sleep for eight hours even on a plane.

Usually |

manage to sleep

for eight hours even ona

plane. (manage)
7 Were you a fast runner when you were a child?

Could you run

fast when you were a child? (could)

8 | haven't finished my homework.

| haven't manage to

finish my homework. (managed)

A Underline the correct alternative.

1 Jackie has been so nice. For example,/For me, she took
us to the cinema.

2 You all think that new restaurant is great, but
for one thing/in my view the food isn’t that good.

3 Ibrahim said the concert was disappointing, and
| must say/the reason | say | agree.

4 Shakespeare borrowed most of his stories.
Let me give you an example:/I must say the plot of King Lear
is taken from a much older story.

| like that laptop. For one thing/I do think it’s a bit

heavy, though.

People love the Rolling Stones, but for me,/

the reason | say this is Led Zeppelin is the greatest

rock band.

Dogs are the best pets. For another/The reason | say this is
because they are so faithful.

You should buy that mobile. For one thing, it looks
fantastic. For another/For example, it's cheap.

141

--- PAGE 141 ---

8

LANGUAGE BANK

GRAMMAR

142

articles

We use articles in front of nouns for various

purposes:

Use a/an (indefinite article):

* the first time something is mentioned.

+ before singular nouns. She's watching a film.

+ with jobs. I’m adoctor. He's an artist.

Use the (definite article):

+ when there is only one of something.

+ when something has been mentioned before.

+ with seas, oceans, rivers and country names
that are plural or use extra words like
Kingdom, e.g. the United Kingdom

+ before the names of some areas, e.g. the
south of France, the coast of Italy

* with superlatives. Ali was the greatest boxer.

+ with some defining expressions, e.g. the first,
the only

* in some phrases with prepositions, e.g.
in the morning, at the end, by the next day

* with dates in spoken English, e.g. the 5th of May.

Use no article (zero article):

* to talk generally about things or people.

+ with most names of towns, cities, and countries.

+ before plural nouns. | bought six books.

+ in some phrases with prepositions, e.g.
on Monday, at work, for lunch, on foot

+ with sports. / like tennis. He plays football.

relative clauses
There are two types of relative clauses: defining
and non-defining.

defining relative clauses
Use relative clauses to talk about what a person,
place or thing is or does.
Use relative pronouns to join the main clause and
the relative clause:
+ who for people He's the man who sold me the coat.
* where for places This is the town where | was born.
+ which for things It’s the hat which he lost.
* when for times This was the moment when
Mr Moran knew he was in trouble.
+ whose for possessions (it means ‘of which or of
who’) This is Sarah, whose husband you met.

quantifiers

Use some when talking about ‘a limited amount/number’ (not a
large or small amount/number). We often use some in positive
sentences. In this instance several can also be used:

| have some close friends. | have several close friends.

We also use some in questions, especially in requests and offers:
Can you give me some sugar? Do you want some help?

We often use any in negatives and questions: / don’t have any children.
We sometimes use any in positive sentences when we want to
emphasise that there are no limits: / can come any time.

Use much and many in questions and negatives.

Much is used with large amounts of an uncountable noun: How
much time do we have? Many is used with large numbers of a
countable noun: | don’t have many friends.

All means ‘everything/everyone’. We can use it with or without of.
We use a lot, lots of, and plenty of with large amounts/numbers. We
usually use these in positive sentences. Plenty of means ‘more than
enough’ (so there won't be a problem): | spend a lot of time in Paris.
Too and too much/many mean ‘more than necessary’. We use much
with uncountable nouns. We use many with countable nouns.
Enough means ‘as much as we need’. We use it in positive and
negative sentences and questions:

There isn't enough time. Do you have enough sugar? | have enough.
None and no can mean ‘zero’. We use none of + noun/pronoun.

We use no + noun (without article or possessive adjective).

A few means ‘a small number’. We use it with countable nouns.

We usually use it in positive sentences: She knew a few actors.
Alittle and a bit of mean ‘a small amount’. We use them with
uncountable nouns. We usually use them in positive sentences.

We can use that instead of which or who:

Are you the lady who/that | spoke to on the phone?

We can leave out who, which and that when these words are not
the subject of the relative clause. Compare: She’s the girl (who) | saw
yesterday. (The subject of the relative clause is | (not who). So we
can omit who.) with: She’s the girl who speaks French. (The subject of
the relative clause is who. So we cannot omit who.)

non-defining relative clauses
Use non-defining relative clauses to add non-essential information.
+ The sentence is grammatically correct without the non-defining
relative clause.
+ Use acomma before the clause and a comma or full-stop after it.
* We do not omit the relative pronoun (who, which, etc.):
| saw Tim, who looked happy.
+ We cannot use that instead of which or who:
| saw the film, which was great.

being

asking for advice apologising
a good Is it OK if | (do this)? Yes, of course./No, you'd better not. Sorry about that.
guest | didn’t know (you

What should | do (in this situation)?

If | were you, I'd ...

Do | need to (take off my shoes)?

Yes, you should./No, it’s not necessary.

were in a meeting).
My apologies. | didn’t

Did | do something wrong?

It's OK. We can sort it out./Don’t worry about it.

realise (you were busy).

Is this a bad time?

No. Come in./Can you come back later?

--- PAGE 142 ---

PRACTICE

A Find and correct the mistakes. There is one mistake

with articles in each sentence.

1 Are you ready to go? Flight leaves at 6.00 p.m.

2 Bobby's girlfriend is engineer.

3 Thousands of people were at the game, so there

was lot of noise.

4 |sawa doctor about my pain. Fortunately, a doctor

said it was nothing serious.

5 Laila was hungry so she ate bit of bread.

6 The women live longer than men.

7 We went toa party but there weren't the many

people there.

8 We looked up and saw an aeroplane in sky.

9 | work as cleaner in an office block.

10 My wife and | have lived in United States for

several years.

A Complete the sentences with who,
which, where, when or whose.
1 |metaman
burned down.
2 This was the moment
we knew we would win.
3 | spent several months in Rome,
is my favourite city.
4 The village, Teresa
grew up poor but happy, was very
small.

5 The girl sold you the
carpet is from Morocco.
6 That blog, he writes

every day, is one of the most popular

in the country.
7 Jill married a guy she
met on a dating site.
8 | don’t want to be with someone
whole life is spent
surfing the net.

house had

B Read the story. Do you get the joke? Complete the
story with the words in the box.

much many few little lot

An old man reaches his 120th birthday. A journalist
comes to interview him. ‘What is the secret of your long
life?’ he asks. ‘Well,’ says the old man, ‘I don’t have

a problems, | don’t drink 2

alcohol, | eat a? of good food, and |
spend a‘ time every day relaxing. But
do you want to know my real secret? | never disagree
with anyone.

‘That's ridiculous!’ says the journalist. ‘There must be
another secret.’

A® moments later, the old man says,
‘OK, you're right.

B Rewrite the sentences using relative clauses. Use the words in italics
and the words in the box.

that who (x2) which (x2)

where when whose

1

What's this programme? Did you want to watch it?

Is this the programme that you wanted to watch ?

Last year | met a translator. She spoke six languages.

Last year | met a translator F

It was six o'clock on the fifth of August. At that moment, the world
changed forever.

It was six oclock on the fifth of August

They gave Jodie an apple. She ate it quickly.
They gave Jodie an apple,
You see that apartment? Felipe lived there.
That's the apartment
She spent a month in Manchester. She loved it.
She spent a month in Manchester,
The boss's office is next to mine. He’s always shouting!
The boss, :
My boyfriend is coming to visit me. He lives in Barcelona.
My boyfriend,

A Put the words in the correct order to make conversations.

1 A: Dol need to shake everyone's hand? 4 A: Did | do something wrong?
B: no, / necessary / not / it’s B: don’t / it / about / worry
2 A: is/if/it/1/into/ take / meeting / coffee / OK / 5 A: What should | do if I’m late?
the /? B: if / you/1/ were, / I'd / an / train / earlier / catch
B: Yes, of course. 6 A: sorry/that / about. | / you / know / here / were /
3 A:1/to/ realise / didn’t /1/ send / by / the / didn't
information / had / email. B: No problem.

B: It's OK. We can sort it out.

143

--- PAGE 143 ---

9

LANGUAGE BANK

GRAMMAR

hypothetical conditional: past

if clause

would clause

if + had + past participle | would have + past participle

If | had seen my friend, | | would have spoken to her.

clause:

Use the hypothetical conditional past to talk about
hypothetical or imaginary situations in the past.

It describes an unreal or impossible situation, e.g.

Real situation = | woke up late. Hypothetical situation:

If |had heard my alarm clock, | wouldn’t have woken up late.
(I didn’t hear my alarm clock. | woke up late.)

We can start sentences and questions with the if or would

Note: The past perfect tense (had + past participle) is
used to show that the action was in the past. Compare
this to hypothetical conditional, present/future

where the past simple tense shows an action is
hypothetical.

Note: When the sentence starts with if, we use a
comma after the if clause.

In written and spoken English, we use contractions with
hypothetical conditional sentences in the past, except
in very formal documents:

She’d have told us if she’d heard anything.

We wouldn't have left early if we’d known you were coming.
The defendant would not have been caught if he had
stayed in his home. (formal)

They wouldn't have been late if they had caught the bus.
If they had caught the bus, they wouldn't have been late.
What would you have done if | hadn't called? If | hadn't
called, what would you have done?

active versus passive + when we don’t know the doer (the person or thing that
h . does the action):
the passive The film star was murdered.
active passive + when the identity of the doer of the action is not
present The shop doesn’t Credit cards aren't Impartant; . .
simple accept credit cards. | accepted here. This cheese is made in Italy.
. (It’s not important who actually makes it.)
Is anyone using that | Is that computer . an :
present computer at the being used at the * if the doer of the action is obvious:
continuous | ment? moment? The thief was arrested.
pant Someone told us to | We were told to be (The police are the only people who could arrest the thief)
simple be here at 8.00. here at 8.00. If we want to say who does/did the action, we use by:
sa No one has asked us | We haven't been The sineaneil oven was sisi by Percy nena ssipeel
perfect about the date. asked about the date. We sometimes use the passive to emphasise a particular
Someone will give I'll be given a car on partef the sentence. sie i ,
will me acaron my next | my next birthday. Frank Lloyd Wright designed the Guggenheim Museum of
birthday. Art in New York.
with
Use the active voice to talk about the things people do: The Guggenheim Museum of Art in New York was designed
Sam ate the chicken. by Frank Lloyd Wright.
To make the passive, use subject + be + past participle. In the second sentence, the emphasis is on Frank Lloyd
Use the passive voice: Wright.

+ to talk about what happens to things or people.
Khaled has been given a prize.

The passive is often used in newspaper reports and other
formal writing.

expressing uncertainty

saying you don’t know saying you are not sure, but you have an idea

| have no idea.*

| haven't a clue.*

I'm sorry but I'm really not sure.

| don't know but | can try and find out.

I'm not a hundred percent certain* but it might be ...
I'm fairly sure® it’s ...

*Sure and certain mean the same thing. We can use
either of them in these expressions.

*These are both informal.

saying you know what it isn’t saying you used to know

| can’t remember.
I've forgotten.

It’s definitely not ...
I'm sure it isn’t ...

is

1

--- PAGE 144 ---

PRACTICE

A Match 1-8 with a)-h) to make sentences. B Rewrite the sentences using the third conditional.
d 1 If we had arrived earlier, 1 Maya was late for the meeting. Her car broke down.
¢ 2 | wouldn't have told her If Maya’s car hadn't broken, she woldn't have been late for meeting
3 If he hadn't fallen asleep, 2 She felt ill so she didn’t come to the concert.
4 We would have called you She would _ have come to the concert if she hadn't felt ill
5 If I'd done all my homework, 3 | didn’t get the job. | wasn’t qualified.
6 John would have brought a present If | had _qualified | would have got the job
7 If the teacher hadn't helped him, 4 They didn’t buy the house. They didn’t have enough money.
8 | would have bought that computer

They would have bought the house if they had had enough money

BNhe aon ae failed the exam. 5 We lost the game. Our best player was injured.
) if he’d known it was your birthday. If our best player hadn't _been injured we would have lost the game,
re wouldn't have crashed the car.

@ we wouldn't have missed the plane.
e) if it had been on sale.

*) if I'd known it was a secret.

‘BN would have passed the course.
Whif we'd had your number.

6 You didn’t tell me you were coming so | didn’t cook a meal.
| would have cooked a meal if you had told me you were coming

A Underline the correct alternative. B Complete the sentences with the active or passive form of the
1 Ohno! My wallet has being stolen/ verbs in brackets. Use the verb tense in italics.
has been stolen/has stolen! 1 The magazine _is read (read) mainly by teenagers.
2 Were those documents be sent/send/sent It_is pulished (publish) every month. present simple
by email or by post? 2 Most of his programmes aren't filmed (not film) in Europe;
3 Not many houses are been built/are being he usually ___ work _ (work) in Asia. present simple
built/are being build at the moment. 3 The book Was written (write) by an ex-soldier. It
4 That piano isn’t been played/ described _ (describe) the war in Vietnam. past simple
hasn't be played/hasn’t been played 4 My last company __made (make) clothes. It__ was bought
for years. (buy) by a multinational company called Zed. past simple
5 Cars that are parked illegally 5 The buildings @¥e been cleaned an) and the walls
will be removed/being removed/ have been painted (paint). present perfect
to be removed. éiave been given (give) a new office but [havent moved (not move)
6 Are those toys make/be made/made my things in there yet. present perfect
by hand? 7 Today this dishiS"'t being cooked, cook) in the oven. Instead,
7 We weren't employed/not were employed/ we __are using (use) the grill. present continuous
weren't employ by the government 8 English!!! not be spoke ot spoken) everywhere in future. Lots of
until 1998. people willspeek (not speak) it. future (will)

8 We can’t use the photocopier because
it's being repaired/repairing/be repaired
right now.

A Underline the correct alternative to complete the sentences.

What's my PIN number? I’m forgetting/I forgotten/I've forgotten.

Can you smoke in the restaurant? I’m sure isn’t/I sure it isn’t/I’m sure it isn’t legal.

What is this drink? It’s definitely am not/definitely not/definite not orange juice.

How old is he? I’m surely fair/fair sure/fairly sure he’s twenty.

What's Maria's second name? | haven't the clue/have a clue/haven't a clue.

What's the world’s biggest building? | have no idea/have not idea/am no idea.

Where do the Smiths live? | not remember/can't to remember/can’t remember.

When does the game start? I’m not a hundred per cent certain/certain hundred per cent/
the hundred per cent certain but it might be at 2.00.

ONAU RWN

145

--- PAGE 145 ---

10

LANGUAGE BANK

GRAMMAR

reported speech

direct speech (actual words) | reported speech

‘| always buy organic food.’

He said (that) he always bought organic food.

‘I'm going to see my mother
tomorrow.

She told me she was going to see her
mother the next day.

‘ve passed my exams. He said he had passed his exams.

‘We saw her at the station’ | They said they had seen her at the station.

‘I'll meet you here’ He said he would meet me there.

‘can’t hear you. She said she couldn’t hear me.

‘We might be late!’ They said they might be late.

‘| must leave at midday. He said he had to leave at midday.

Use reported speech to report what someone said earlier. After a past
tense reporting verb, e.g. said, told, etc., the original verb often moves
one tense back (this is sometimes called ‘backshifting’).

There may be other changes to pronouns, possessive adjectives, and to
references of time or place:

‘I'll go.’ + She said she would go. ‘It’s my car’ > He said it was his car.
‘We'll see you tomorrow. — They said they would see us the next day.
‘ll be here’ + She said she would be there.

Must changes to had to, but mustn’t doesn’t change:

‘We mustn't be late’ > They said they mustn't be late.

NOT Fhey-saie-they didnt haveto-betate-

Could, would and might also don’t change in reported speech:

‘We might see you later’ > They said (that) they might see us later.
Say and tell are the most common reporting verbs. Note the different
verb patterns:

He told me that he'd be late. She said (to me) that she wanted to stay.

verb patterns

Many different structures can follow a verb in English.
Some verbs are followed by an -ing form, and some
are followed by the infinitive:

I can't stand listening to opera.

He learned to speak Mandarin when he moved to
China.

verb + infinitive with to: agree, ask, tell, expect, learn,
manage, help, decide, offer, promise, want, refuse,
need:

We managed to get to the theatre on time.

They agreed to give us cheap tickets.

verb + -ing: like, love, hate, can’t stand, (be) keen on,
look forward to, miss, enjoy, fancy, give up, practise:

| miss spending time with my friends and family.

We look forward to seeing you.

Sometimes there is no need to change the
tenses (no backshift). This is the case when
the reporting verb is in the present tense:
‘ll meet you at the airport’ > He says he'll
meet us at the airport.

If the information we are reporting is still
true in the present, we do not need to
change the tenses but if the reporting verb
is in the past, we can:

‘It’s a great film’ — She said that it’s a great
film. (This is still true now, or She said that
it was a great film. (Implies she’s seen it and
thought it was good at the time)

reported questions

Reported questions have the same tense
and word changes as reported statements.
To report a yes/no question, use if/whether
after the reporting verb:

‘Do you live in Peru?’ > She asked me if |
lived in Peru. or She asked me whether | lived
in Peru.

To report a Wh- question, use the question
word:

‘Where is the restaurant?’ > She asked me
where the restaurant was.

In reported questions, the word order is the
same as for statements. We do not use an
auxiliary do/does/did:

‘Do you like eating sushi?’ > She asked me
if | like eating sushi.

Reporting verbs use many different verb patterns, so it’s
important to learn the patterns. Some verbs can use more than
one structure, e.g. suggest.

He suggested that we meet at 6p.m.

She suggested having lunch in the cafeteria.

verb + infinitive with to: offer, promise, refuse, agree:

They offered to give us a lift to the station.

They promised to phone when they arrive.

verb + object + infinitive with to: invite, warn, tell, ask:

They invited us to stay for the weekend.

He warned them not to tell anyone.

verb + -ing: suggest, recommend:

They suggested trying another restaurant.

He recommended eating at Café Fish.

verb + that: explain, warn (someone), promise (someone), suggest:
She explained that she had to leave the meeting.

He promised that he would take me out tonight.

giving advice/ | advice Warnings

warnings Make sure you ... / If | were you, I'd... Watch out for ... / Be careful to/of ...
Don't forget to ... / You need to... Don't ... (or else ...) / You'd better ...
The most important thing is to ... Whatever you do, don’t ...

146

--- PAGE 146 ---

PRACTICE

A Complete the reported statements using tense changes
(backshift).

1 ‘We're going to have a baby.

He said (that) going to have a baby.
2 ‘I've lived here for more than twenty years.
She that she had lived for more

than twenty years.
‘We grew these carrots in our garden.’
They told us that they
garden.
‘| have to go to the dentist tomorrow:
He said (that) he to go to the dentist the
day.

WwW

grown the carrots in

5 ‘I've lost my passport.
She said that had lost passport.
6 ‘I'm feeling a bit stressed.’
She me that she feeling a bit
stressed.
7 ‘We'd never been to the US before.

They said that never been to the

US before.

‘| can’t stay long because | have to go to a meeting’

She said that she stay long because she
to go to a meeting.

fo}

A Complete the reported statements below with the verbs in the
box and any other necessary words

refuse agree promise suggest offer warn invite explain

R

‘I'm afraid I’m not going to pay for this meal?

He refused to pay for the meal.

‘You need to show your passport to immigration,’ she said to him.
She he his passport to immigration.
‘If you book your tickets in advance, you'll get two for the price of
one,’ she told us.
She

‘ll pick you up on the way to the station.
He
‘Why don’t you all come for lunch on Sunday?’

She us for lunch on Sunday.

‘I'll definitely cook something for dinner’

He something for dinner.

‘Be careful to hold on to your bags at the station.

She on to our bags at the station.
‘Yes. It's a good idea to have the meeting on Tuesday.

He the meeting on Tuesday.

nN

Ww

our tickets in advance.

N

A Make sentences giving advice/warnings using the prompts.
1 forget / set / alarm.

2 you/ need / buy / ticket / before / get on the train

3 if!/you/ call them / before you leave

4 watch out / speed cameras. There / lots on the road.

pick me up on the way to the station.

B Read the pairs of sentences. Then correct the
mistakes in the reported speech.

‘| think that La Tasca’s is my favourite restaurant’
She said she thought that La Tasca was their
favourite restaurant.

‘I'm going to meet Mr Susuki this afternoon.
He told me that he met Mr Susuki that afternoon.
‘Maja called me yesterday.

He said that Maja has called him the day before.
‘We'll meet you here tomorrow:

They told us that they will meet us there the
next day.

‘We haven't received your application’

We told her that we hadn't received your
application.

ray

N

Ww

6 ‘I might see you at the party, Matt!
She told Matt that she will see him at the party.
7 ‘I've already sent you an email explaining the

situation!

He said that he already had sent an email
explaining the situation.

‘I can’t type very fast.

She told her boss that she could type very fast.

B Find and correct the mistakes. There
are mistakes in six of the sentences.

1 The company has agreed that pay for
the trip.

They recommended going toa
different hotel.

3 | suggested to that she look for

another job.

She suggested to call an ambulance.
We offered helping, but there was
nothing we could do.

The manager refused let us leave

the hotel before we met his wife.

We promised to sending her a postcard.
| explained that there had been a delay.

5 make sure / apply for a visa

6 whatever / do / don't / leave valuable items / the room
7 important / thing / check / flight times

8 forget / take your mobile phone

14?

--- PAGE 147 ---

148

VOCABULARY BANK

Lesson 1.2 RELATIONSHIPS

La Complete the family tree with the words in the box.

imtaws sister-in-law niece nephew grandparents on my mother’s side ex-husband

stepfather stepdaughter

B Tell your partnePabout_one ortwo people iiryeu

ay

uncle

4
cousin sister

ale

daughter

father-in-law mother-in3é

4
husband

R=STYo) ie eye) Mole Wale) Me with take, get, do and go

AL Write the words and phrases in italics in the correct places in the word webs below.

1 your best, exercise, nothing for you, the cleaning

hobby ;
exercise (action)
well
your best (good effort)

the washing up

the cleaning (something at home)

‘ou good
“nothing for you'be affected)

2_ fired, a prize, excited, food poisoning

agood salary

a prize (earn)
ajob (change your
C= fired work situation)
——flu/acold __

(become ill)

food poisoning

depressed

excited (penne)

3 alook, the blame, sugar, ages

medicine
sugar (swallow)
__ten minutes _ 5
; ages (use time)
a look (action)
responsibility _ (accepting
the blame _ something)
4 on holiday, crazy, together, badly
blind
crazy (become)
well
badly _ ‘nappen)
on holiday (travel)
—__with
__together _(%

--- PAGE 148 ---

Lesson 2.1 PREPOSITIONS feagytres

1 Match descriptions 1-5 with pictures A-E.

1

Z
3

4

They drove along the motorway,
and over the bridge.

They went around the city.

They drove through the main
square, past the post office and
turned left by the station.

The hotel is near the city centre,
between the National Museum
and the cathedral.

The house is next to the
supermarket, opposite the cinema.

Lesson 2.2 THE NEWS

LA
bo

1

N

foe]

wo

10

Read the text and match the words and phrases in
ld with definitions 1-10 below.

a group of criminals who work together

thieves carrying weapons

an attack by criminals on a bank, shop, etc., to
steal money or valuable things

(doing something) while threatening to shoot
someone

people whose job it is to protect people or a
place, or to make sure that a person does

not escape
leave a place or dangerous situation when
someone is trying to catch you

people who saw the crime

took people who were involved in a crime away
(to a police station)
warn people that something bad is happening

made someone do this

wo security guards were kidnapped and

held hostage for twelve hours by a gang of
armed robbers, who attempted to raid a security
depot. The robbers held the guards at gunpoint
and forced them to hand over keys and security
information. They then proceeded to fill a lorry
with more than £53 million in notes. Another £150
million was left behind because there was no more
room in the getaway vehicle. Luckily, one of the
guards managed to raise the alarm, and the police
arrived and arrested the gang before they could
escape. Eye witnesses said that they saw at least
eight men being arrested.

B Divide the words and phrases into two groups: people and actions. Which words do not fit in either group?

C Tell your partner about a crime you've heard about. It can be from the news, a film or your own experience.

149

--- PAGE 149 ---

VOCABULARY BANK

Lesson 3.1 EXPRESSIONS Biya

LA Lookat the examples for the different uses of get. B Underline the expressions with get in
get + noun = obtain sentences 1-6. Match each sentence with the correct
Sophie got a new job yesterday. use of get in Exercise 1A
get + noun = receive 1 He gets money by selling furniture on the internet.
He got a letter from the company. 2 | don’t know when I'll get around to finishing
get + noun = buy that book.

Can you remember to get some milk on the way home? 3 We need to get permission to use the room.
get somewhere 4 \'m getting tired. Shall we finish there?
What time did you get here? 5 Did you manage to get some new trousers?
get + adjective 6 What time does the train get to Budapest?
I'm getting bored of this.

get in phrasal verbs
| really need to get on with my work.

Lesson 3.2 IDIOMS

1 A Match pictures A-F with the idioms in the box.

break the ice

travel light let your hair down be in two minds

B Complete the sentences with the idioms above.

1 Tomorrow there’s a test on this poem. | have to it :

2 I'm . | don’t know if | want the black one or the red one.

3 Everyone was nervous, so Jackie told a few jokes to

4 Healways . He only takes one suitcase even for long trips.

5 I've got no money at the moment but we can go if you want.

6 You've been working non-stop. Why don’t you go out and 2

C What do you think the idioms mean? Use a dictionary to help you.

150

--- PAGE 150 ---

Lesson 4.1
PERSONAL QUALITIES

1A Complete the sentences with the
adjectives in the box.

reliable sensible easy-going
aggressive bright honest keen
punctual moody independent

1

10

She is very . She
works well by herself.
You never know what to expect.
She's very so
one minute she’s happy, and the
next minute, she’s shouting at you.
She's very . I’m sure
she will know what to do if there’s a
difficult situation.
He's extremely . He is
never late for appointments.
My new manager is very

. She doesn’t mind
what time we get to work, what we
wear. She never looks stressed.
He always tells the truth. He’s very

She's always looking for extra jobs to
do. She's very ,

He's very . He learns
very quickly.

You know that you can trust and
depend on him. He's hard-working
and very ;

He nearly attacked one of his
employees when he arrived late

for the meeting. He’s very

B Look at the adjectives in the box
again. Do they describe positive or
negative characteristics? Do you have
any of these characteristics?

Lesson 4.1 WORKING LIFE

L A Match descriptions 1-3 with jobs A-C.

personal assistant
EE i work as for a large

corporation. | usually work nine-to-five, but
sometimes | have to work late. My job | |
involves checking and responding to emails, Window cleaner
answering phone enquiries and organising
my boss's diary.

EA 'man_accountant | tend to work long
hours. I’m responsible for a small team of
people. | spend a lot of my time attending
meetings, and dealing with problems.
| advise clients on their accounts and write
updates and reports for the website.

3 window cleaner
I'ma . Lots of people

wouldn't like what | do, because it’s an
outdoor job, and it’s a physical job, but

| love it. | work for myself, so | can be very
independent, and | work flexible hours,
which is good for me. It’s a very sociable job,
too. | talk to people all day long. | couldn’t
do an office job. | would die of boredom!

Accountant

B Work in pairs. What do the phrases in bold mean?

Lesson 4.1 CONFUSING WORDS

1 A Choose the correct option from the words in bold to complete
the pairs of sentences.
1 actually - currently
a) | expected the first week in my new job to be awful, but
actually it was fine.
b) lam currently working in London, but before | was
working in Paris.
2 career + course
a) She's doing a Spanish __ Course at the moment,
and she’s really enjoying it.
b) Ted spent most of his career as a teacher.
3 borrow: lend
a) Do you think you could __!end me a pen?
b) |had to _ borrow some money from a friend.
4 argument: discussion
a) We had an interesting discussion _ about the Prime Minister
and we all agreed he should resign.
b) |hadan__argument__ with my mother. She's always telling me

what to do!
5 miss: lose
a) Hurry up, or we'll miss the bus.
b) Why dol always ___lose my car keys?

B Check your answers in a dictionary.

151

--- PAGE 151 ---

VOCABULARY BANK

Lesson 5.1
TECHNOLOGY

AL Match words and phrases
1-10 with pictures A-).
1 plugitin

press the button
have an injection
have an operation
run out of petrol
break down
(not) get a connection
restart/reboot the
computer

9 doan experiment
10. switch it on/off

ONAUBRWN

Lesson 5.2 WORD BUILDING Hinman)

1 A Look at the table in Exercise B. It shows six different suffixes used to
form nouns from verbs and adjectives.

imitation
B Underline the stressed part of each word in the table. What patterns | pay | imitate |

do you notice about where the stress occurs? heaviness

In -ation words, the stress always comes on the a of -ation.
skating

-ation education relaxation imagination immigration

-ion | pollution instruction depression competition . . | skate |
informality

-ment | entertainment improvement employment agreement

payment

informal

direction

direct

-ing | running smoking laughing eating

-ness weakness loneliness happiness kindness

-ity creativity stupidity sensitivity responsibility achievement

quotation 5

C Cover the table and complete sentences 1-10 with the correct form
of the verbs and adjectives in brackets. quote

1 I think a bit of competition (compete) in schools is a good thing. dance dancing

2 There has been a great improvement (improve) in his work recently. fitness

3 Dealing with problem clients is not my responsibility (responsible). | fit promotion

4 Loneliness (lonely) is one of the worst aspects of getting old.

5 He suffers from _ depression (depress). securit

6 Try touse your imagination (imagine). secure |

7 Icouldn’t believe my own _snupidity (stupid)!

8 There is liveontertainment (entertain) from 8p.m. 2 Change the words above to the

9 Iwas amazed byhis__kindness _ (kind), correct noun form and add them to
10 I didn’t hear the last instruction (instruct). the table.

152

--- PAGE 152 ---

Lesson 6.1
-ING/-ED ADJECTIVES

1 Complete definitions 1-10 with the

pasou

corr

ect form of the adjectives in the box.

ais
dis:
fru

exciting/excited _ terrifying/terrified

aston shing/9ston's ie YaMs RCNA

depressing/depressed
interesting/interested

ng/tired pfascinating/’
appolnting/ disappointed
ae cc

. 3Q4QPOBbIBalOLNn
strating/frus Fated? "

1

S

wu

a

N

co

Xo}

10

you want to know more about it
and you give it your attention:

| was _ interested in what he had
to say.

being happy, interested and hopeful
because something good has
happened, or is going to happen:
The kids are getting really
_excited about the trip.

very surprising:
It’s astonishing
know about this!
making you feel that you want to
sleep or rest:

It was along, _ tiring journey.
extremely interesting:

Istanbul is a _fascinating city,
unhappy because something you
hoped for did not happen:

!was disappointed that | hadn't won.
making you feel sad:

It'savery depressing book. | didn't
like it at all.

extremely unpleasant and making
you feel sick: : :
What's that smell? It’s disgusting
feeling annoyed, upset or impatient
because you cannot control/change
a situation:

He gets frustrated when people
don’t understand what he’s saying.
very frightened:

I'm absolutely _ terrified
spiders!

that you didn’t

of

Lesson 6.1 MULTI-WORD VERBS

1 A Match the phrasal verbs in sentences 1-10 with meanings a)-j).
verb + off
b 1 Icalled him on the phone but we got cut off.
f 2 They had to call off the football match because of the weather.
a 3 | have to do this work. | can’t put it off any longer.
verb + out
d 4 I'd like to check out some other options.
5 He's wearing a pink jacket so he'll stand out from the crowd.
j 6 | can’t work out what to do about the problem.
verb + after
h 7 My neighbour is looking after my cats when we go away.
C 8 He takes after his father. They are both very good-looking.
verb + in
i 9 Canyou print out and then fillin the form and send it back to me?
e€10 Saskia, please let me in!

~a) delay doing something
“p) the phone suddenly stopped working.
look/behave like an older member of the family

“d) get more information about something

“e) allow someone to come in
™f), decide that a planned event won't happen

g) be easy to see/notice

hy take care of something or someone
“i write the necessary information in an official document
> decide/plan something to solve a problem

B Label pictures A-E with sentences 1-10.

153

--- PAGE 153 ---

VOCABULARY BANK

Lesson 7.1 SUCCESS

1 A Match expressions 1-8 with
definitions a)—h).
1 beonashortlist b

2 come first a

3 benominated Cc

4 winanaward 4d

5 beon the winning team f

6 wina medal e Vt first.’ ‘Iwona prize for best

7 bearunnerup g ‘Lwas the * ! student! 14

8 getan A’ h ‘lwon the bronze * f A’s in all my exams!
~a)win

be named in a list (chosen from a larger
‘Grou to be considered for a prize or job
c) be officially suggested as a possible prize
winner (or candidate for an important job)
d) receive a prize/money/title because of an
achievement
e) receive a valuable piece of metal because
of success in a competition (or bravery,

: | was > for ‘My book was ona
e.g. in war) —_———_—_—>
f) i art i sano thatwingaeatie! Best Actor but | didn’t win. 6 for Book of
Part o''a group 8 The Oscar was awarded to the Year, but it didn’t win. I’ve
competition : , 7 ,
. . . Rick Rooney. never won an
g) come in second place in a competition,
race, etc. SESE arn
h) get the highest grade for a piece of ae Fy any
academic work : sr IW,
AWE <i
B Look at the situations opposite and complete
the captions with the words in the box.
winning medal award got nominated
runnerup_ shortlist not come
‘l was on the ® team!’
So Wee eee) eee with prepositions
LAin each sentence the same preposition is missing B Match the verb phrases in Exercise 1A with
twice. Complete the sentences with the prepositions definitions a)-k).
in the box. a) create a text write about
to on in for about with b) look after to care for

, Tomliehe with b c) refuse to change your mind _ Stick to
coulant cope my Doss any more so d) be involved in take part in

I decided to part_with the company. 4} keenvohaved! lps work for

2. The journalist wrote @20Ut_ the farm workers, who . .
f) cause something to happen (two phrases) resulted in lead to

were protesting about_ their low salary. . : : :
3 Always stick to what you believe in; this will g) spend time and effort doing something working on
h) leave to part with

lead to true happiness. : ;
4 She worked __for__ a rich family, and her job was i) continue goon

tocare for the sick grandmother. j) deal with a difficult problem or situation

5 The scientists started working ON _a project, successfully — cope with
but without any money they couldn't goon. k) show publicly that you think something is wrong

6 Aged ten, she took part _in a play and this protest about
resulted __in her love of the theatre.

--- PAGE 154 ---

Lesson 8.1 GETTING ON

1A Match 1-6 with a)-f) to complete the sentences.
My neighbour:

1 is very helpful. For example,

sometimes borrows my tools
pops over most days, because
lends me sugar or milk
is really unfriendly. She
is always gossiping

au hRwWN

a) but he never gives them back!
b) he fixed my car last year.

c) doesn’t even say ‘good morning’.
d) she likes to chat.

e) about people who live in the street.
f) if | need it.

Lesson 8.1 COMPOUND NOUNS

‘L A Put the words in the box next to the correct key word
to make compound nouns. Which compound nouns
are written as one word? Use a dictionary to check.

racket office Darier cream co

5
machine Ptayer lab fag Towt Sone arn

card glasses

racket
court
player

1 tennis

cup
2 coffee shop
machine

office
3 post code
card

barrier

4 language learner
lab

tan

5 sun glasses
cream

B Underline the words and phrases in 1-6 which
match definitions a)-f).

a) comes to my house (informally) pops over

b) not friendly unfriendly

c) uses my possessions borrow my tools

d) gives me things (which | will later return) lands me
e) helps alot helpful

f) talking about other people (usually bad things).

always gossiping
C Are any of the sentences in 1A true of your
neighbours?

B Put the key words in the box in the correct places.
Which compound nouns are written as one word? Use
a dictionary to check.

book machine phone room shoes

1 running
sports
high-heeled

shoes

nN

cheque
picture
text

book

3 bed
dining
changing

room

4 sewing
washing
drinks

machine

5 mobile
pay phone
cell

155

--- PAGE 155 ---

VOCABULARY BANK

Lesson 9.1 HISTORY

L Use one word from each row in the table to complete 1 1066 is the date of the Norman __invasion
sentences 1-12. of Britain.
2 Edward Gibbon was a great _ historian _. He wrote
moun verb adjective _ person The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.
1 | favasion invade invader 3 Indiawasa__colony __ of Great Britain until 1947.
2 Evite historical tictotian 4 South Africa's first democratic _ elections, in which
historic black people could vote, took place in 1994.
3 | colonisation/ . . 5 Inthe eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
colony reales onioniisar William Wilberforce led a movement to
4 | democracy | democratise | democratic | democrat liberate ___slaves. -
5 | liberation liberate iiberator 6 Alexander Fleming is known for his _ discovery
- : - of penicillin.
a iieaiie od 7 Fidel Castro was the _ leader of the Cuban
7 | leadership lead leader revolution of 1959.
8 | politics political politician 8 The Kennedys and the Bush family are known for
9 | development | develop developing | developer their involvement in American politics _.
10 | invention invent inventive inventor 9 The World Bank lends MONEY to develop _
; ; countries, particularly in Asia and Africa.
ak, | eaxaibtten foi fant seouitier 10 In 1901 Wilhelm Rontgen won the Nobel Prize in
12 | independence independent Physics for his invention _ of the X-ray.

11 BillGatesisthe founder __ of Microsoft.
12 Angola gained its independence from Portugal
in 1975.

R-TSYo) ee ey 0) ole Vale) SME with come, give, have and make

1 write the words and phrases in italics in the correct places in the word webs below.

1 across the mountain, with instructions, to dinner, nearer 3 acold, achance, ideas, 100 calories
closer 210 pages .
(move towards) (contain)
——alongway _ memories __
a long wa’ (travel) memories (thoughts)
in blue a disease
— (be produced/sold) * (illness)
over . responsibility .
(visit) (opportunity)
2 aprize, permission, orders, me a headache 4 aliving, an agreement, a film, an effort
___advice___ (tell someone alist a ee
something) P
a donation an attempt
(present) oY
Sz
responsibilit __adeal_
(allow) «abso
; me a shock ___afortune___

(cause feelings) (get money)

156

--- PAGE 156 ---

Lesson 10.1 THE ENVIRONMENT

1a Complete the text with the words and phrases from the box with
the same meaning as the words and phrases in brackets.

gtebalwarming pollution aerosol cans protect

industrial waste factory smoke natural resources
destroys the environment harmful environmentally-friendly

car exhaust fumes destruction of the rainforest
aN

Many people are worried about the
state of the planet, and the effects
of '___ global warming
(an increase in world temperatures,

caused by an increase in carbon

dioxide around the Earth). A growing
human population is putting pressure on the Earth’s

2 , (things that exist

in nature and can be used by people, for example

« oil, trees, etc.) like food and water. Also, a lot of
human activity is ? (causes

damage), either because it causes *

(dirty air, water or land), or because it

5

b
°
e
e

ecccccces

(damages the air, water and land so badly that it

might not recover). Some of the most common

causes of damage are:

Of (chemicals and
unwanted materials which factories throw away)

ecccccce

OF and
8

7°? (which contain
CFCs —a chemical which damages the
ozone layer)

e 10

—which increases the amount of
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.

eooce

~ Environmentalists try to |! the
environment (keep it safe from harm) by
encouraging people to change the way they live
(recycling more, using '?

or ‘green’ products which do
not damage the environment, wasting less, etc.)
and persuading governments to take
environmental issues more seriously.

ecccce

B Complete the table with words from the text in Exercise 1A.

noun verb

a destroy
protection 2

4 pollute

4 damage
waste 5

Lesson 10.1
WORD BUILDING FrYaies

L Look at the prefixes in the table and

com

plete sentences 1-12 witha

suitable form of the words in brackets.

in-

invisible
inappropriate
inaccurate
inadequate
inability

immature
impossible
impolite
immobile
immoral

irresponsible
irregular
irrelevant
irrational

exe

ex-girlfriend
ex-Prime Minister
ex-husband
ex-boss

ex-wife

10

11

12

The number is not correct. It’s

. (accurate)
Let me introduce you to my

, Amelia. (wife)
| can’t do it. It’s !
(possible)
It’s difficult to travel because
the buses and trains are very

. (regular)
You can’t leave without saying
goodbye. It’s . (polite)
She behaves like a child. She’s very

. (mature)
You can’t come to the office dressed
ike that. It's
(appropriate)
He left his laptop on the train. He’s
very . (responsible)
used to work for him. He’s my

. (boss)

There is no good reason for it. It’s
completely . (rational)
t doesn’t do the job. It’s

. (adequate)
She refused to move at all. She was

. (mobile)

15?

--- PAGE 157 ---

COMMUNICATION BANK

Lesson 1.2

3 C Look at your drawing. Does it include these things? 8 A Student A: read your instructions below.

4 wheels 2 saddle 3 chain % handlebar You work for a famous business school. Student B
wants to do a course at the school. Interview him/her.
Use the following prompts and ask about:

+ his/her reason for doing the course

+ his/her work experience

+ his/her expectations of the course

+ his/her plans for the future

Prepare the questions. Remember to ask your partner
why he/she is a good candidate for the school and, at
the end, if he/she has any queries about the business
school.

B Change roles and role-play the interview again.

5 pedals 6 crossbar Lesson 2.1

1 B Read and check your answers.

Lesson

? B Read the text and check your answers.

Fact or fiction:

1 Fiction: the film The Last Samurai does tell the
story of the samurai rebellion, but the character
Nathan Algren did not exist.

Stella magazine commissioned YouGoy, a research
agency, to interview over 1,000 women in the UK
about everything from their eating habits to their

relationships and family values, to find out what
they really think. Here are some of the results.

158

Eighty percent of women say that losing their health is
their greatest concern, followed by putting on weight
(52%) and losing their jobs (24%). It seems that British
women aren’t too happy with their bodies: twenty-three
percent of women are on a diet now and fifty-eight
percent have gone on a diet in the past. Only four
percent of women do more than seven hours’ exercise
per week, while twenty-one percent do no exercise at all.

The biggest challenge for modern women is balancing
home and work life (82%), followed by bringing up happy
children (56%) and finding time for themselves (52%).

As for their love lives, nine percent of women aged
45-54 met their husbands through the internet, and
forty-nine percent of women believe that the best age
to get married is between 25 and 29.

And what about the relationships between men
and women? Fifty-nine percent think fathers should take
more responsibility for their children. These women
are also less than content with their husbands’ efforts at
home: fifty-one percent say they currently do over
seventy-five percent of the housework. Despite this,
over seventy percent of women would prefer to have
a male boss than a female.

And their heroes? The woman they most admire
is ex-Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher (7%), followed
by the Queen (5%).

Fiction: in truth, we know very little about
William Shakespeare's personal life, or what
provided his inspiration.

Partly true: the film Braveheart does tell the story
of how William Wallace fought to free Scotland,
but kilts were not worn in Scotland until 300 years
later. And there are many other historical
inaccuracies.

Partly true: the film Apollo 13 was praised for its
accuracy. Much of the dialogue was taken directly
from recordings. However, the pilot's exact words
were, ‘OK, Houston, we've had a problem here’.

8 A Student B: write Have you ever ...? questions using
the prompts in the box below.

win a competition/some money

eat something very unusual

break a bone in your body

lock yourself out of the house

ride a horse/motorbike

climb a mountain/run more than two kilometres

--- PAGE 158 ---

Lesson 2.4

6 B Student A: Look at the picture story. What happened? Why was the robbery attempt a failure?
Prepare to tell your story to your partner using the phrases in Exercise 5C.

6B Change roles and role-play the situation.

Student B

You are a guest at a hotel. Your room is too small.
Ten minutes ago you called reception to ask if
there are any suites available. Then room service
arrived with a trolley of sweets (cakes, ice cream,
etc.). Call reception to make your complaint.

a

You are a receptionist at a hotel. A guest calls
to make a complaint. Start the conversation
by saying ‘Reception. How can | help you?”

Ss

Hello. Yes, I'm afraid | have a problem ...
Explain the problem again and ask if there is
a suite available.

a

Apologise for the misunderstanding. Explain
that there are no suites available at the
moment, but there will be tomorrow.

SS

| Check details and thank the receptionist for

Student A

their help.

a

Confirm details, apologise again and end the call.

? D Check your answers.

1 False. Compare: This is absolutely correct.
(formal) This hits the nail on the head.
(informal)

2 True. The order of the words in hit the nail
on the head, let's face it, close to my heart,
etc. cannot be changed.

3 True. They don’t have much time. They're
running out of time. (present continuous)
We didn't finish. We ran out of time.

(past simple)

4 True. It’s close to my heart =| feel passionate

about it.

5 A Check your answers.

1 Michelangelo 2 AlGore 3 FWde Klerk
4 Gael Garcia Bernal 5 Philips and Sony
6 JRR Tolkien 7 Germany won in 2014

8 Jurassic Park

Student A

? A Check Student B’s answers to your
questions.

1 Canberra 2 India 3 Paraguay

159

--- PAGE 159 ---

nid

6 A Work out your score. Add up the number
of points (0, 1 or 2) for each answer. Use
your total to find out if you work like a
millionaire.

\) Question] a)O b)1 oc)2
\) Question2 a)1 b)2 oc)O
\) Question3 a)O b)1 c)2
\) Question4 a)1l b)2 oc)O
\) Question5 a)O b)1 c)2

Key:
Score 8-10 You work like a millionaire!

You are very ambitious and enjoy your work.
Keep going. Sooner or later all your hard work will
pay off and you can live like a millionaire, too.

Score 6-7 You have millionaire potential!
You understand hard work, and if you make it
your top priority, you could be a millionaire, too.
Keep focused on your goal.

Score 0-5 You don’t work like a millionaire!
The clearest characteristics of self-made
millionaires is that they work hard and they
enjoy their work. You seem to prefer a work-life
balance, where work and money are not your

top priorities.

8 B Read the vocabulary notes and check your answers.

remember ® remind

If you remember something, a fact or event from the past, or
something you earlier decided to do, comes back into your mind:
He suddenly remembered he had to go to the bank.

If someone reminds you to do something, or something reminds
you of something, they make you remember it:

Can you remind me?

forget ° leave

If you want to talk about the place where you have left something,
use the verb leave, not the verb forget. Compare:

I've forgotten my book and I've forgotten my keys.

I've left my keys in the car.

Don't say: I've forgotten my keys in the car.

If you hear something, you know that sound has been made, and
can often recognise what it is:

Did you hear that noise?

If you listen to something or someone, you pay attention to the
words, sounds and music that they are making:

Can you say that again? I'm sorry, I wasn't listening.

Use fun to talk about events and activities that are enjoyable, such
as games and parties. We can also use it to talk about events that
aren't enjoyable.

Being ill on holiday isn't much fun.

Funny is an adjective that describes someone or something that
makes you laugh:

Bob's jokes are really funny.

6 B Student B: Look at the picture story. What happened? Why was the burglary attempt a failure?
Prepare to tell your story to your partner using the phrases in Exercise 5C.

--- PAGE 160 ---

L1 choose one of the job advertisements
below and write your covering letter.

FASHION DESIGNER WANTED:

We are looking for a graphic designer with a
background in the fashion trade. You should
have relevant experience and be up-to-date
with fashion trends. Strong hand illustration
as well as computer design is essential.
Please submit a copy of your CV with relevant

TEACHING ASSISTANT, BAHAM.,

Primary school is looking for a teaching assistant
to start ASAP. The school is a short walk from the
beach. No formal qualifications are necessary;
however, a genuine love for the job is required.
Please forward CVs or contact me for further
information.

TRAVEL WRITER REQUIRED.

Travel writer wanted to join our small team.
ae) The successful applicant will travel around the
? world, staying in luxury hotels, and dining in fine
? restaurants. He/She will need to send a weekly
update, including a short review. No previous
experience required, but good communication
skills and a love of travel essential.

1 C check your answers.

1 Nobody has ever done it, but in theory,
yes it is possible.

2 Because it is made of frozen water. It must
be below zero degrees Celsius to freeze.

3 Yes. If you travel, you'll notice that you can
see different constellations of stars. This is
because the surface of the Earth is curved.

4 When we cut an onion, it releases a
substance called lachrymatory-factor
synthase. When a very small amount goes
in your eye it irritates the eye. We then
produce tears (we cry) to wash the
substance away.

5 Neither hot nor cold. A rainbow is an optical
phenomenon caused by the refraction and
reflection of sunlight by water. It is the
same temperature as the air around it.

6 Because the heavier you are, the more
difficult it is to push you out of the ring
(which is how you win a sumo wrestling
match).

Lesson

4 B Student B: read the text below to see if your ideas are

mentioned.

ddoeLa\

Te is no one quite like Stephen Wiltshire. Born in 1974, Stephen
was always different. As a child, he couldn’t make friends. In fact,
he talked to nobody, showed no interest in school subjects and wasn’t
able to sit still. Stephen was diagnosed as autistic'. He didn’t learn fully
to talk until he was nine years old and he didn’t manage to pass his
exams, but he found one thing he liked doing: drawing. Art became his
way to communicate.

He started by drawing funny pictures of his teachers, but soon began to
draw buildings. His eye for detail was perfect. He could see a building
just once and remember everything about it. In 1987, aged twelve, he
saw a train station in London called St Pancras. Hours later, in front
of TV cameras, he managed to draw this complicated building, with
the time on the station clock saying 11.20, the exact time when he was
there. The drawing showed every detail perfectly.

Since that television programme made him famous in the UK, many
great things have happened to Stephen. He has become a well-known
artist, published several books of his drawings, taken helicopter rides
above the world’s great cities — including London, Rome, Hong Kong
and New York — and drawn amazing pictures of them, and opened his
own art gallery, where he now works, in London.

His drawings are incredibly accurate — he always manages to draw
everything in the right place — but also beautiful to look at. In 2006, he
was given an MBE” by the Queen of England for services to art.

‘autistic /o:'tistik/ adj — having a mental condition that makes it hard for
someone to understand other people and form relationships

2MBE - Member of the British Empire, an award given by the Queen for
outstanding achievements

C Read the text again and answer the questions.

1 How was his behaviour different from the other children?

2 What special talents does he have?

3 How did the public learn about his special talents?

4 What country/countries has he been to and what did he do there?
5 What has he published?

6 What is his ‘job’ now?

D Tell your partner about your text. Use questions 1-6 to help.

161

--- PAGE 161 ---

COMMUNICATION BANK

Student B

2 B Read the texts below and make
notes using the prompts below.

What was the development?
Where did it take place?
When did it happen?

Why was it important?

Learning to eat meat

Humans are badly designed animals.
We are slow, we have weak teeth,

and we don’t have tails. That’s why
we need something extra to match
other animals. And that’s why eating
meat - a development that probably
started in Africa around 2.5 million
years ago - became so important.
Meat gives you fats and proteins that
you can’t get with other food. But
more importantly, meat-eating led

to hunting, and hunting helped to
develop our imaginations. When you
hunt, you need to see what isn’t there,
to see what’s behind the next tree or
over the next hill. We wouldn’t have
become the most imaginative - and the
most intelligent - of the animals if we
had continued eating only plants.

Teaching people to read

Until the end of the twelfth century,
Latin was very difficult to learn.
Students read and memorised texts
for years. Then a Frenchman called
Alexander de Villedieu developed a
fast method to teach Latin: he used
simple rules and wrote them in verse
so the students could remember them
more easily. Seeing the success of his
method, Alexander wrote a grammar
book, Doctrinale, published in France in
1199. It became a bestseller and spread
quickly through Europe, and started a
great literacy movement. This new type
of learning became the foundation of
modern education. If he hadn’t written
Doctrinale, education would probably
have remained the same for hundreds
of years.

Student B

? A Look at the notes and describe a big moment in history. Think
about the questions below.

* 1981 -IBM launched the first personal computer. Microsoft wrote
the software.

* By 1984 IBM was selling three million PCs a year. Apple launched
a rival, the Macintosh, which used a mouse and icons.

* 1985 - Microsoft launched Windows and used some of the
same tools.

1 Why was this event important?
2 What happened before and after the event?
3 Would the world be different if this event had not happened?

B Describe your big moment to other students.

Student B

? A Youare going to ask Student A the questions below. First, add two
more questions of your own. The answers can be found on page 163.

0 Which football team won the first World Cup in 1930?
Was it Brazil, Argentina or Uruguay?
What was discovered in the Alps mountain range in 1991?
Was it the body of a 5,000-year-old man, the body ofa
hairy elephant, or a World War II aeroplane?

When did the European Union introduce the euro?
Was it 1979, 1989 or 1999?

5)

8 A Student B: read your instructions below.
You want to do a course at a famous business school which is
well-known for its practical courses. It will give you contacts in the
business world. Think about these things:
* the business you want to start
* relevant work experience you have with another company
Student A will interview you for the course. He/She will ask about your:
* reason for doing the course * expectations of the course
* work experience + plans for the future
Prepare your answers and think of some questions to ask about
the school.

B Change roles and role-play the interview again.

--- PAGE 162 ---

Lesson 10.1 |

Group B

6 A Look at the photo and read the fact
file below. Discuss the questions and
make notes about your discussion.

THE CARBON PROBLEM

Did you know ...?

* Transport is responsible for 25 percent of
the UK's carbon footprint, and that
doesn't include flying. In the UK, there
are more cars than the number of
households. In California, there are
more cars than the number of people
living there.

Currently cars are used for 18 percent of
trips under a mile and for 62 percent of
trips of between one and two miles.

38 percent of car trips are taken by one
person alone, and 34 percent are shared
by two people.

Lighting and household appliances like
washing machines are responsible for
around 35 percent of the carbon
pollution from your home, and most of

8 A Student B: read the instructions below.
You work in the Tourist Information centre. A customer would like
to visit the Australian Outback. Give him/her some advice using the
phrases in Exercise 4A and the prompts below:
1 Don’t approach dingoes. They can bite. Throw away any leftover
food.
There are some poisonous snakes. If see one, move slowly away.
Flies can be a problem. You could buy a fly net to fix onto your hat.
You need to wear a hat and use suncream. Take plenty of
water / drink.
Don’t wear high heels / new, expensive clothes. The land is rough
and rocky.

BR WD

w

B Change roles and role-play the following situation.

Student B: you are a tourist. You want to go snorkelling on the reef.
Ask the dive instructor for advice, e.g. Are there any special clothes
you should wear? What equipment do you need?

I'd like some information about going diving. First of all, what clothing
do | need to wear?

Student A

? A Look at the notes and describe a big moment in history. Think
about the questions below.

your electricity bills. If every household
in the UK put a solar panel on their
roof, we would produce more
electricity than we need as a nation.

é - Boxing Day Tsunami, 2004, killed 230,000 in eleven countries.
Badly affected India, Thailand, Indonesia and Sri Lanka.
Underwater earthquake measured approximately 9.2 on the
Richter scale (second largest recorded in history).

* Hurricane Katrina, 2005, killed 1,836, affected mainly poor blacks
in New Orleans, USA.

* Earthquake in L'Aquila, Central Italy, 2009, killed over 300 people.

1 Why was this event important?
2 What happened before and after the event?
3 Would the world be different if this event had not happened?

B Describe your big moment to other students.

Student B

rary

Do you think every family needs to
have access to a car? Why/Why not?
2 What do you think should be done to
reduce the number of miles people
drive in cars/fly in aeroplanes?

?@ A Check Student A’s answers to your questions.

. 1 Uruguay
3 Do you think people should generate
their own electricity using wind/solar ; —— ots SOD earale rian

power, etc., or should governments
choose options like nuclear power?

4 What laws/schemes would you
introduce to deal with these problem?

--- PAGE 163 ---

AUDIO SCRIPTS

Furie

Part one

Is your brain male or female? Well, you might think it’s a strange
question but some researchers have found that men and
women’s brains are actually wired differently. So, let's do a test to
see if your brain is male or female. In a moment, we're going to
ask you to draw a picture of a bicycle. So, make sure you have a
pen or pencil ready.

Part two

OK, so | want you to draw a picture of a bicycle. You have exactly
one minute, starting now ... Make it as beautiful or normal as
you like. Include as much detail as you can. You've got forty-five
seconds left ... You've got another fifteen seconds ...

You've got five seconds left ... four, three, two, one, zero, stop.
Right, stop drawing please. Now, write down on your piece of
paper, whether you, the artist, are male or female. That's all we
need to know for the experiment. Now turn to page a hundred
and fifty-eight to see what a real bike looks like.

JUnit.

Part three

Now, count up the parts on your drawing. Did you include
wheels? A handlebar? A saddle? A chain? A crossbar? Pedals?

Did your bike have at least five parts? And could it work? Now for
the difference between the men’s drawings of a bicycle and the
women’s: female drawings often include a person riding the bike;
men’s drawings don’t usually include a person. This is a clear
indication that women think people are important. Men, on the
other hand, are more interested in getting the machine right. So,
how did you do? Is your brain male or female?

Unit.

Conversation 1

S=student T=teacher

T: And what about your expectations of the course?

S: Well, as | said, I’ve studied English for many years and spent
time in Britain, but that was a few years ago. So for me the most
important thing is to just refresh ... and try to remember my
English and practise speaking and listening.

T: OK. You've got a very good level of English so we'd put you in
the advanced class. Is there anything else?

S: Could | ask a question?

T: Of course.

S: | can take the morning class from nine to twelve. Is that right?
T: Yes, that’s right.

S: And in the afternoon there are options? Optional classes?

T: Yes, these are special classes with a special focus like English
idioms, conversation, pronunciation. We have the full list here.
S: | see. Thank you.

T: No problem. OK, well, thank you very much.

Conversation 2

|=Interviewer A= Applicant

I: There are a couple of things I'd like to ask about, Jade. Your CV
says you have some experience of looking after children?
A: Yes, | was a tutor on a summer camp last year.

I; Can | ask you about that? What type of things did you do?
A: Um, well, | organised games.

I: Games for?

A: The children.

I; OK. And what age were the children?

A: Um ... seven to ten.

I; OK. And you enjoyed it?

A: Yes.

I: What aspect, what part did you enjoy, would you say?

A: | suppose I'd have to say | liked the games best.

I: And any problems?

A: Um, no.

I: What about the different ages? We often find that different
ages together can be difficult.

A: It depends. In my opinion, you can usually get the older
children to help the younger ones.

Conversation 3
|=Interviewer S = Student

I: | think that’s about it. Do you have any questions? Any queries?
S: Um, yes, actually | do have a query.

I: Yes, go ahead.

S: It's about online classes at the university.

I: Right.

S: If I’m accepted, | saw that there are ... urm, that it’s possible to
take some courses online.

I: That's right.

S: So | wouldn't need to attend classes?

I: Not for the online courses. But, erm ... well, one thing I'd like
to say is that the online courses are, in many ways, more difficult
than face-to-face courses. Certainly in terms of reading and
writing, they're really quite demanding.

funiea ce

OK so I’m going to tell you something about myself. My name is
Monica Nielson and | live in a small town near Bologna, in Italy.
| think three words that describe me would be happy, talkative
and hard-working. One of the things | love about my lifestyle

is that | love the house where | live. | live in an apartment with
my boyfriend, and it’s an old apartment in the historical part of
town, so it's very beautiful. It’s quite small, so | suppose that’s
one thing | don’t like. My favourite smell is the smell of the sea.
We live quite far from the sea here, but in the summer, | love

to drive to the coast, and breathe the sea air. It makes me feel
good. And, finally ... if | could change one thing about the past,
| would bring my grandmother back. She was a lovely lady and |
miss her a lot.

Unit ce

P1=Presenter1 P2=Presenter2 R= Rosie (a film historian)

P1: Hi and welcome to The Film Show, where today we're looking
at the Hollywood biopic and why it’s become so popular. Now,
Hollywood has always used true stories in its films. In fact, they
began making successful films in the 1920s, and since then there
have been thousands of films based on true stories.

P2: That's right, but in recent years, there’ve been more and
more biopics. Directors have turned to the lives of famous
people as a source of material. So, why is it that some of the best
films in recent years have been based on real events, or inspired
by real people?

P1: Today, we're talking to Rosie Truman, an actor and a film
historian. Rosie, why do you think Hollywood is doing so many
biopics?

R: Well, one reason is that audiences really enjoy films about
people that they already know something about, but they want
to know more. So, from these films we've learnt something.
We've learnt about the difficult lives of some of the biggest
music legends, like Ray Charles and Johnny Cash. And we've
learnt about the lives of politicians, like George Bush, or sporting
heroes, like Muhammad Ali. It’s a way in which Hollywood can
actually teach us about history in an

entertaining way. And it’s interesting.

P2: Yes, | think that’s right.

P2: But what about the actors, Rosie? | mean, many of the actors
have won Oscars for their roles in these films. What's it like for
hem?

--- PAGE 164 ---

R: Well, | think actors just love these roles. It’s very exciting to be
asked to play a character who everyone already knows. Look at
Helen Mirren. She won an Oscar for her role playing the Queen,
and it's probably one of her greatest successes.

P1: Oh, absolutely! So, how do they do it? How does an actor
prepare for a role like this? Do they meet the person that they're
going to play?

R: Well, yes, obviously, if that person is still alive, then that’s a
great way for the actor to study the character, to see how they
move and how they talk. In fact, | know that Helen Mirren met
the Queen for tea, you know, very English. And that really helped
her to understand her character. And Will Smith, who played
Muhammad Ali ... well, when they met, they got on really well,
and ... and they became friends.

P2: But what about playing a character that everyone knows, like
George Bush, for example?

R: Yes, it’s funny actually, when you're playing a character that
people recognise, you have to work really hard at getting the
voice right. Josh Brolin played George Bush. And when he was
preparing for the film, he talked to himself all day in a Texan
accent. He even phoned hotels in Texas, just so he could listen to
their accent.

P1: Really? That's funny. What about actors who can’t meet the
character in person? What do they do?

R: Well, there are other ways to prepare. Audrey Tautou, for
example. She played Coco Chanel. So she couldn't meet her in
person, but she watched hours and hours of film footage. She
watched her in interviews, and she looked at the photographs.
Tautou wanted to look like Coco Chanel when she was on screen,
so that we would recognise the image.

P2: That's right. And it was a beautiful film.

R: It was, and you know one of the things ...

JUnit 2

P=Presenter N1=1stnewsclip N2= 2nd news clip
N3 =3rdnewsclip N4= 4th news clip

P: Hello. | know what | was doing. Do you?

N1: Buckingham Palace has announced the death of Diana,
Princess of Wales. The Princess, who was thirty-six, died late last
night in a car crash in central Paris.

N2z: It's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.

N3: Breaking news in here at five live. There are reports that a
plane has crashed into the World Trade Center in New York.
That's a plane is reportedly crashed into the World Trade Center
in New York, setting it on fire ...

N4: President Kennedy and Governor John Connally of Texas
were shot today from an ambush as President Kennedy’s
motorcade left the centre of Dallas ...

funiez ca

W=Woman M=Man

M: OK, so, tell me all about it ...

W: Well, in the beginning, | was at home, and ... um... this was
just one morning before a very important interview ...

M: Uh-huh.

W: And... um ... | didn’t feel well, so my mother had given me
some pills, and um ... then | didn’t think anything more about it.
So, anyway, erm ... | then got on to the tube, um ... to go for my
interview.

M: Right, and what happened then?

W: Well, um ... clearly | must have fallen asleep, because | wasn’t
feeling great by this time. And um, I’m starting to feel sleepy,

so I’m thinking | must have fallen asleep. Anyway, erm ... | was
getting some funny looks, even before | fell asleep, but anyway.

| fell asleep, and then | realised, before long, um ... | must have
been having a dream, | suppose, about my mother. And all of a
sudden, I’ve woken up, but | haven’t just woken up, I’ve woken up
shouting the word, ‘Mum!’.

M: No! You're joking!

W: At the top of my voice, in a packed, quiet tube.
M: Oh no!
W: Yes, and everybody's staring at me, and that did not help,

er, matters. Anyway, I’ve got off the tube, and I've then arrived

at my interview, put all that behind me, I’m not, I’m still not
feeling a hundred per cent perfect, but nevertheless arrived at
my interview on time, and go in, and think, actually ‘This is going
rather well. They're not saying an awful lot, and come to think of
it, they're looking at me in a rather strange way.

M: Right ... Then what?
W: Well, the next thing | knew, | have left the interview, and said
‘thank you very much for seeing me, blah-di-blah ... and gone
to the ladies’ room. And there in the mirror, | could see what
everyone was looking at, and why they couldn’t say anything,
M: What was it?

W: My face had swollen up!

M: Ah! No way!

W: It was bright red, and ...

M: No!

W: and covered in blotches, spots ...

M: Oh! You're kidding!

W: Yes, and the pills that my mother had given me were so
out-of-date that they had caused an allergic reaction ...

M: Oh! How embarrassing!

W: | know.

Unite

M=Man W2=2ndwoman W=Woman

M: OK. What do we reckon? True or false?

W2: Erm ... | don’t know. | think it might be false because ... |
don’t know ...

M: Yeah, she was a little bit slow in telling the story ...

W2: | don’t know if your mum would give you out-of-date pills ...
M: Yeah, would a mother giver her daughter out-of-date pills?
W2: | think false.

M: It sounded like she was trying to think

of what to say next, so ... you t think false,

| think false.

W: Yes, it was false!

funie2 ee

OK. This story is about a man called Radu Dogaru, who stole
famous paintings from a museum in Rotterdam. In fact, he
stole paintings by Picasso, Matisse and Monet. The paintings
were worth millions of pounds. What Radu didn’t realise was
that because the paintings were so famous, he had difficulty
selling them. So, he tried to hide them at home. Later, the police
thought they had caught Radu. However, the problem was that
when they went to search for the paintings, they couldn't find
them. It seems that when Radu’s mother, Olga, found out what
Radu had done, she destroyed the paintings by burning them
in her oven in order to protect her son. In the end, Radu was
arrested for the theft.

Units re

L=Laurie K=Kenna_J= Javier

L: OK, so what do you think, Kenna? Are you a planner or a
procrastinator?

K: Me? Oh a planner, definitely.

L: Yes, | think so. You generally like to do things ahead of time.
K: Absolutely. Yeah. | like to be organised, and know when
everything is happening.

| have to be like that, actually. It’s the only way to get everything
done.

165

--- PAGE 165 ---

166

AUDIO

SCRIPTS

J: Really? | hate planning. | like to leave things until the last

minute. | mean, you never know
might need to change your plan.

what's going to happen. You
s, so why bother making plans in

the first place? No, | like not knowing what I’m going to be doing.
K: But that’s impossible. What about holidays, for example? You

must know what you're doing fo!

r your next holiday. | mean, you

need to decide where you're going, how you're going to travel,
book the dates, get the tickets ... There’s so much do organise.
Surely you have to plan for holidays? You can’t just put that off

until later.
J: Not really. | don’t mind where

go.

K: No, | don’t believe, ... you're just saying that. | think you do
make plans, you just don’t like to admit it.

J: No, really. | much prefer to wai:
get invited somewhere.

it and see what happens. | might

L: OK, so maybe for holidays. Bu
made any plans for tonight?

what about tonight? Have you

K: Yes. Of course. | can tell you exactly what I’m doing tonight.

This evening a friend of mine's c

oming over. We're eating at my

house — I’m going to try out a new pasta recipe. And then we're

going to the cinema to see that
L: Javier?

new Argentinian film.

J: Uhhh ... | don’t really know. I'll see how | feel. | might go out, or

| might jus
to plan.

stay at home and re

lax. | told you. | really don’t like

L: How about at about work? Are you more organised at work?
Do you multitask? | mean, how do you make sure you get

everything done?

J: ... actually, | think | am a procrastinator. | do get jobs done, but
| never get started straight away. | tend to waste time and get
distracted and leave the job for ages. And then just before the
deadline, | work really hard, sometimes all night. And then | don’t

stop until the job is done. It’s qu
done in the end.
K: You don’

ite stressful, but everything gets

use your time very wisely then? Oh no, I'd hate that.

| don’t think | could work with you.

Unit 3

Conversation 1

W=Woman M=Man

W: Hi. Me again. I’ve sent an attachment with all the figures for

the last six months. That should

be all you need.

M: Sorry — | didn’t catch any of that.
W: I’ve sent the figures in an attachment. Is that Tom?

M: You've lost me. Who is this?

W: This is Ana Lucia. Is that Tom?
M: No, this is Willy's Burger Bar. What number are you trying to get?

W: 845 6795.

M: | think you’ve got the wrong number.

W: Oh I’m sorry.
Conversation 2

W=Woman M=Man

M: I've got a reservation in the n

ame of David Cullinan.

W: Just one moment. Umm, could you repeat the last name?

M: Cullinan. C-u-l-l-i-n-a-n.

W: Cullinan. | can’t find the name. Did you make the reservation

over the phone?
M: Yes, just yesterday.
W: Sorry, let me just see if there

are any messages here. | won't

be a moment. I’m sorry. We've got no reservations in the name of

Cullinan, and we're fully booked

tonight.

M: So you're saying | can’t stay here. This is the Sheldon Hotel, yes?
W: No, this is The Felton. With an ‘f’.

M: Really? So I’m in the wrong hotel.

W: The Sheldon is on Queen’s Road, just around the corner.

M: Oh no. Sorry, can you say that again — where is it?

W: On Queen's Road, just around the corner.

Conversation 3
F=Father G=Girl

G: You've missed the best bits. You're late.

F: What exactly do you mean? The show starts at 7.00, doesn’t it?
G: No, it finishes at 7.00!

F: Didn't you say it starts at 7.00?

G: No, it starts at 5.00 and finishes at 7.00!

F: So what you mean is I’ve missed the whole show.

G: Yes.

Conversation 4
M=Man W=Woman

M: We've got nothing for you, I’m afraid.

W: | don’t get what you're saying. You're a car rental company,
right?

M: Yes, but today’s a holiday and all the cars have been booked
already.

W: Do you mean to tell me that there’s nothing at all? No cars
available?

M: There's nothing till tomorrow, I’m afraid.

W: But | definitely booked a car for today, the third of July.

M: It’s the fourth of July today. In other words, your booking was
for yesterday.

W: It can’t be. Is it?

M: It’s the fourth today, madam.

W: Oh no, I've got the date wrong.

}Unit 3 cia
W=Woman M=Man

W: OK, so we're looking at creating a video channel.

M: Yep. The first thing, | think, is what's our target audience?

W: Yeah, what's our aim?

M: Well, we came up with this idea.

W: Go on.

M: That it would be really cool to do a series of videos about
local places, but with a special angle.

W: Oh that sounds good. What's the angle?

M: An hour to kill. So, say you're in Sydney or Istanbul or
anywhere really, and you have an hour to kill, we have a video
of someone describing something to do in that place in an hour
or less.
W: Oh | see. So the target audience is tourists.

M: It could be tourists or local people. Say you find yourself in a
part of the city that you don’t know very well.

W: OK.
M: And you have a bit of spare time, by going onto our video
channel you get all kinds of suggestions of what to do or where
to visit in under an hour. And the clips are filmed on location so
you get to see the places, too.
W: | like it. So who will be the presenters? Will you have any star
names?

M: No, we don’t have any money! We'd get local people to host
each video clip, with just one camera, kind of cheap and cheerful,
low production values, but really cool content.

W: Who are our competitors or rivals? It must have been done
before.

M: Oh I’m sure, but | don’t know if it’s been done with the angle
of an hour to kill.

W: OK. Um, what else? How often will we upload videos?

M: Well we'll try to get coverage of as many cities and towns
around the world as possible. So, | don’t know, one a day? Soina
year we'll have three-hundred-and-sixty-five. Then we just carry
on from there.

W: Wow. Very ambitious. What about a name?

M: We thought of One Hour Wonders.

W: One Hour Wonders. | like it!

--- PAGE 166 ---

Unit 4 ce

Luca

Well, I've always loved sport and swimming. As a kid | used to
spend all my free time in the summer on the beach with my
friends. We would swim or surf, or just play about in the water.
And there was always a lifeguard there on the beach, and | used
to think, ‘What a brilliant job!’. So, when | left school, | trained
to be a lifeguard. | really enjoyed the job for a few years. In the
summer | would work on the beach, and then in the winter |
would go skiing. It was my dream job. | loved it. But after a while,
| started to get bored. | was just on this boiling beach all day,
watching all the beautiful people, but | couldn’t really enjoy
myself, you know. | just had to stand there and watch. So | knew
it was time to find something else to do.

Nicola

| used to be an ice-cream taster and for a while it was definitely
my dream job. | mean can you imagine anything better than
sitting at work eating delicious ice cream all day? | was in
heaven. | was working for a big company, with a team of food
scientists, and our job was to come up with new ideas for ice
cream flavours. So, | suppose that was the problem, because a
lot of the time, we had to try new flavours, like curry and lime ice
cream, or cheese and sausage, and we would have to taste it, and
usually it was terrible, really disgusting. Now most people would
just say, ‘Yuck, I’m not eating that again’. But unfortunately,

when it’s your job, you have to keep tasting it to see if they have
made it any better. Sometimes we would taste thirty different ice
cream flavours before lunch. So, it wasn’t all good.

Amy

was a professional shopper for a while. It was good fun at first.
The lady | worked for was a television presenter, and she needed
outfits to wear on television, but she didn’t have time to go
shopping. So | would go out and buy clothes for her, then she
would try them on at home, and | would take back anything that
was no good. It was a fascinating insight into how some people
ive. But as time went on | realised she was impossible to please.
One time | had to buy her an outfit for a special event she was
going to, and | bought her a few different things to try on, but
she didn’t like any of them, and she was really furious that
hadn't found her something different. It wasn’t really my fault,
but | lost my job soon after that.

funit4
W1=Woman1 W2=Woman2 M1i=Mani1 M2=Man2

W1: OK, so we're looking at plans for the new café. First of all, we
need to decide on the location. Then we'll look at what kind of
food we're going to offer, and possible names for the café.

M1: Yes, that sounds good.

W2: OK.

W1: Right. Let's focus on the ideas we had for the location.

We looked at some options last time, but we need to make a
decision.

M1: | liked the one near the station. It would be really busy
during the week when everyone comes in for work. But what
does everyone else think?
M2: Yes, | think the station idea is good.
W2: | think we need to decide on the kind of atmosphere we're
looking for. The location near the shopping centre would be a
really nice place to visit at the weekend.

W1: Hmm.
M1: I'm not sure that | agree, actually. The way | see things, we
need to choose the location which will give us the most custom.
And | think that will be the café near the station.

M2: And it’s cheaper.

W2: That's a good point. | suppose so.

W1: So, shall we say we'll look at the location near the station?
All: Yes. Good idea. Yes, OK.

W1: Good. So, moving on to the next point, what kind of food are
we going to serve? What do you think?

M1: Hmm ... how about an Italian café?

W2: Mmm... I’m not sure ...We talked about Italian, but there
are lots of other Italian cafes around. | really feel that it would be
hard to make ours different.

W1: OK - good point. | think we should think about something
different then. Any ideas?

M2: Well, | was thinking about a Portuguese café, you know, with
delicious cakes and pastries. There are quite a lot of Portuguese
people in this area, and tourists too. | think that style of café
would be really popular.

W2: Yeah, a Portuguese café. | think that’s a great idea. What do
you think?

All: That's OK. Yeah. Nice.

M1: That's a nice idea. We could do Portuguese-style lunches too,
or office workers.

W1: Yes, maybe. So, are we all agreed? A Portuguese café?

All: Yes. That's fine by me.

W1: OK. Let's recap. A Portuguese café selling cakes and

unches, located near the station. Right. So, what would we call
it? Café Express?

M1: I’m not sure about that. | think we need to come back to the
type of café we're establishing. So Café Portugal? Or something
ike that ...

W2: Why don’t we call it Café do Sol? Or Café Lisboa? Café ...
umm ... Café Fado ...

W1: | like Café Lisboa. | think it sounds really good and Lisbon’s a
beautiful city.

M1: Café Lisboa. | like it.

M2: Yes, that sounds good.

W1: OK, we're running out of time. Let's sum up what we've
decided. It’s going to be a Portuguese café. We think the station
location might be good. And we like the name Café Lisboa. Is

hat right?

All: Yes, | think so. That's right.

W1: OK, so we'll need to decide on...

funits aa

’m a pharmacist so | work six days a week. The pharmacy opens
at nine a.m., but | need to be at work before then so | can get
everything ready. | usually wake up at about six thirty, sol can
get the kids up and ready for school, and then go for a run
before work. I have to leave home by eight-thirty at the latest.
The morning is the busiest time in the pharmacy, so the first
hing | do when | get to work is start preparing prescriptions

so they’re ready for customers to collect. It’s a community
pharmacy, so | know a lot of the patients quite well. As well as
giving out medicines, we try to give advice on healthy living. |
hink people really appreciate being able to talk to someone in
he pharmacy and get advice or treatments without having to
see a doctor. | usually have lunch at about one p.m. Sometimes
bring my own lunch, and on other days | like to leave the shop
and wander around. | might buy something to eat or even try
out a new café. The area near where | work is really nice, and |
often bump into people | know. In the afternoon | try to catch up
on all the admin tasks that need doing. | check my emails and
upload information to our website. | often take phone calls from
receptionists, nurses and even doctors from the local surgery,
checking information about medication.

| leave the shop at about five thirty p.m. but | usually make some
deliveries on my way home. Some of our older patients can’t
travel to the pharmacy themselves, so they rely on this service. |
try to be home by about seven o'clock so that | have time to read
to the children and put them to bed. I’m usually too exhausted
to do very much in the evening, so | generally just cook supper
and watch some television. And then | like to plan my next day in
my head before going to bed. It’s a long day, but | love my job.

167

--- PAGE 167 ---

168

AUDIO SCRIPTS

funits ce

W1=Woman1 W2=Woman2 M=Man

W1: Why are the windows round on ships?

M: Round windows are stronger, aren’t they?

Wa: Are they? I’ve no idea.

W1: That's right. According to the book, they’re less likely to
break.

Wa: Ah.

M: There you go.

W1: What about this second one? How many hairs are there on
the human head?

W2: Erm ... A million?

M: No, it’s not that many, is it?

Wa: It depends whose head, doesn’t it? On my dad's there are
about three.

W1: The answer is about ten thousand.

M: Oh, really?

W2: 1 think that’s a bit of a stupid question because it depends,
doesn’t it?

M: Well, it was a four-year-old who asked the question.

W2: Oh yeah, that’s true.

W1: Next question: What happens when your plane flies over a
volcano?
W2: Ummm.

M: Nothing happens, does it? Well, it depends on whether the
volcano is erupting? Or whether it’s active.

Wa: Yeah.

W1: Well, according to the book, Jamieson asked a pilot. And

the pilot said as he was flying over the volcano, his engines shut
down, stopped working completely.

Wa: Scary. Did he get hot?

W1: Hmm, it doesn’t say. But he obviously survived. So there you
go. Anyway, what about this one? Why did The Beatles break up?
W2: Dunno. They got old, didn’t they?

M: No, John Lennon went off with Yoko Ono, didn’t he?

W1: Well, Jamieson wrote to Yoko Ono and she replied, ‘Because
they all grew up, wanted to do things their own way, and they did.’
W2: Oh that’s interesting.

M: I’m amazed she replied.

W1: Me, too. OK, last one. After watching a violent video game,
the little boy asked why is there war?

W2: Great question.

M: That’s a really good question.

W2: Hmm, because men like fighting?

M: Political reasons. One country wants the land or the oil or the
gold.

W1: Well, Jamieson asked lots of experts. Most of them didn’t or
couldn’t answer. Then he asked an American army colonel, who
said there are four big reasons: different ideologies, a sense of
honour, economic reasons, and fear.

M: Uh-huh.

W2: Good question for a four-year-old.

M: And a good answer.

funits

Conversation 1

M=Man W=Woman

M: Arggh. Oh no.

W: What's the matter?

M: Oh. This cash machine’s not working. Do you know if there’s
another machine somewhere? | really need to get some money.
W: Hmm ... I’m not sure. There might be one in the shopping
centre.

M: Thanks.

Conversation 2

M=Man W=Woman

W: Argh!

M: What’s the matter?

W: My laptop’s just crashed, again. That's the third time it’s
happened. Would you mind looking at it for me?

M: Sure.

W: Thanks. It’s so annoying. | keep losing my documents. Do you
know what the problem is?

M: Let me have a look. There's a lot of stuff on here. Why don’t
you save the documents onto a memory stick?

W: That's a good idea.

M: And then do you want me to try ...

Conversation 3

M=Man W=Woman

W: Customer services. Good morning.

M: Um, yes. I've got a problem with my vacuum cleaner.

W: Could you tell me what the problem is, sir?

M: Yes, | can. It keeps making a funny noise. And it’s just not
working properly.

W: You say it keeps making a funny noise ...

M: Yes, that's right.

W: OK. Let's see if | can find someone who can help you. Could
you hold the line, please?

M: Yes, of course.

Conversation 4

M=Man W=Woman

M: Oh. | don’t believe it! Excuse me, this machine's not working.
It's just taken my money. Could you give mea refund?
W: I’m afraid | can’t do that.

M: Why not?

W: Well, I’m not allowed to give refunds.

M: But I’ve just lost my money. And | still need a ticket.
W: | can sell you a ticket, but | can’t give you a refund.
M: Well, could you tell me who | should speak to?

W: Yes, of course. You need to speak to the manager.
M: OK. Would you mind calling him for me?

W: Of course not. I'll just call him.

pUnit $y

’m going to tell you about Robo-Chef. Basically, Robo-Chef
can prepare and cook all your favourite recipes. It works like
his. First of all, it washes and prepares all the vegetables,

hen it prepares your dish, and cooks it for you on your cooker.
Robo-Chef comes complete with hundreds of menus already
programmed. But you can also programme Robo-Chef with
your own recipes, or, if you want to try something new, you can
download new recipes whenever you like. All you have to do is
hoose the dish you want, decide how many people you want
Robo-Chef to cook for, and what time you want the meal to be
ready. So, let's say you would like a vegetable lasagne for six
people, ready by eight o'clock. Then, just make sure you have all
he ingredients in the kitchen, press the button, and that’s it.
You can go out to work, and when you come home in the
evening, your delicious supper will be ready. What could be
easier? Robo-Chef is the chef of the future.

fal

i

--- PAGE 168 ---

Unité ce

R=Radio presenter C=Clip P=Professor M=Man

R: Welcome to Start the Day!

C: Hello - can | help you?

Your call is important to us.

Hello - can | help you?

Your call is important to us. Sorry, all our operators are busy at
he moment. Please hold.

M: They put you in a queue for ages, listening to this terrible
music. When you finally speak to someone, you're so angry, you
just want to shout ...

R: Anger. We all know the feeling. A report out last year shows
that people are getting angrier. One in ten people say that they
have trouble controlling their temper. Traffic jams, airports,

call centres, computer crashes — they can all leave us feeling
angry, and anger is difficult to control. Or is it? Professor Miller
rom The Metropolitan University is here to tell us about two
very different therapies to help deal with stress. First of all,
destruction therapy. What's that about?

P: Well, basically, the idea is that a lot of people, when they get
angry, they don’t know what to do with their anger - they don’t
deal with it very well. They just keep it inside. But, if you don’t
deal with your anger, sooner or later it will explode. So with
destruction therapy, you use your anger to destroy something,
but in a controlled way, and the idea is that if you do that, it
helps you to feel better.

R: OK, | get angry a lot. Can destruction therapy help me?

P: Perhaps. We can try it. What we do is we take you to a place
full of old cars. When we get there, I'll give you a hammer, and
you can use it to smash a car to pieces.

R: Really? Is it that simple? If | smash the car to pieces, will | feel
better?
P: Yes, a little. But that’s only the beginning. Then, I'll ask you to
think about a situation in the past when you felt really angry.
And when you think about that anger situation, you'll hit the
car much harder. And the therapy will be much more satisfying.
When we finish the session, you'll feel much better.

R: That's amazing, and businesses are using this kind of therapy
in Spain, is that right?

P: Yes, there are some old hotels in Spain. You can pay to go

and destroy the hotel. So, some companies who feel that their
workers are stressed, or they need to build a team, send their
workers to destroy the hotel. And it's a good way for them to get
rid of that stress. It works.

R: That's incredible. But there’s another idea | wanted to ask

you about. People say that laughter is the best medicine. And
nowadays, laughter therapy is used in hospitals to help people
with pain.

P: That's right.

R: So, how does that work?

P: Well, if people laugh about something, they feel better. On
average, children laugh up to 400 times a day, but when we
grow up, we only laugh about seventeen times a day. And it’s not
enough, because when you laugh, your body produces chemicals
— and these chemicals make you feel happier. And they also
make you feel less pain. So, in Mexico, for example, they use
laughter therapy in hospitals. A group of people go around the
hospital, visiting the patients, and basically, they make them
laugh, by telling them jokes, or doing something funny.

R: And does it really work? Do people feel better afterwards?

P: Absolutely! They feel better, and they don’t need medicine.

R: That's brilliant. So, in Mexico, laughter really is the best
medicine?

P: Yes, it looks like it. That's right ...

WUnit6 oe

Conversation 1

M=Man W=Woman

M: I've got something to tell you.

W: What's that?

M: I’ve been offered a job.

W: Wow! That's fantastic. Congratulations!

There's one thing I’ve got to tell you though.

; Really? What's that?

M: The job is in Germany. I’m moving at the end of the month.
W: That's awful. What am | going to do?

M: | have to go. | hope you understand.

see.

==

=

Conversation 2

M=Man W=Woman

W: Hello. You came in for a job interview last week.

M: Yes, that’s right.

W: Firstly, I'd like to say that we were very impressed with your
interview.

M: Oh. Thank you.

W: However, I’m sorry to have to tell you, but we've offered the
job to someone else.

M: Oh. That's a shame. Thank you, anyway.

W: I’m afraid the other candidate had more experience.

M: | understand.

W: But, we'd like to keep your details, in case another job comes
up in the future.

M: OK.

Conversation 3

W1= 1st woman W2= 2nd woman

W1: You'll never guess what.

Wa: What?

W1: I've just won some money in a creative writing competition.
W2: You're joking?

W1: No, really.

W2: That's amazing! How much did you win?

W1: Two thousand euros.

W2: You lucky thing. How fantastic! How are you going to
spend it?

W1: Actually, I've got so many bills to pay. I'll spend it on that.
W2: Well, it’s good news anyway.

Conversation 4

M1=1stman M2=2nd man

M1: I'm afraid I’ve got some bad news.

M2: What is it?

M1: I've had an accident. | crashed the car.

M2: Oh no. That's terrible. Are you OK?

M1: Yes, I’m fine.

M2: That's lucky.

M1: But, I’m afraid the car isn't.

M2: Oh, that doesn’t matter. You can get the car fixed.
M1: Unfortunately, it was your car.

M2: My car? You mean you crashed my car? How did that
happen?

M1: Well, you see! ...

169

--- PAGE 169 ---

170

AUDIO SCRIPTS

Conversation 5

M=Man W=Woman

W: Dad, I’ve got some good news for you.

M: What is it?

W: Well, you know | was waiting to hear from the University?
M: Yes.

W: Well, ... I'm really pleased to tell you that ... they've offered
mea place!

M: That's wonderful news, dear! Well done. I’m so pleased for you.

W: There’s only one problem though ...

M: What's that?

W: It means I’m leaving home.

M: Well, of course we'll miss you, but it’s fantastic news.

Conversation 6

M=Man W=Woman

: There's something I’ve got to tell you.

What's the matter?

: | split up with Fabio.

Oh no! That's terrible. I’m really sorry to hear that.

: No, it’s OK actually. I’m pleased about it, but guess what?
What?

: He’s already got a new girlfriend.

M: No! That's really annoying.

W: Yeah, and they've got engaged.

M: You're joking!

SSEX=E5=

Conversation 7

W1 = 1st woman W2 = 2nd woman

W1: Bad news, I’m afraid.

W2: What is it?

W1: Steve's lost his job.

W2: Oh no. That's awful. I’m really sorry to hear that.
W1: Do you want to hear the good news though?

Wa: Yes.

W1: The company is paying him thirty thousand pounds.
W2: Really?

W1: He's going to travel round the world.

W2: That's amazing!

JUnit

One of the most, er, memorable moments, or not moments
rather events, in my life ... er... was a couple of years ago. Erm
... [tall started one day when | was at work and my brother
phoned me out of the blue and said, um, ‘What are you doing
the weekend of Sept 23rd?’ or whatever it was. And | said, ‘I don’t
know: He said, ‘Well, book a flight to Norway. My brother lives in
Norway, and | live in England so | said, ‘Why?’ he said, ‘Oh I'll let
you know when you get there - it’s a surprise’ So weeks went on,
and | tried to work out what this could be, but | had absolutely
no idea. So the weekend in question came about ... went to the
airport, got on my flight, and ah | was met there by somebody I'd
never met before. He just came up and said, ‘Are you Stig?’

said, ‘Yes. And he said, ‘OK. Come with me.’ So | went with

him to the car. We drove for a little while, and | tried to kind

of get it out of him where we were going, but he wouldn't tell
me anything. He pulled up outside a hotel, and there was my
brother, and my half brother, and my two half sisters there
waiting for me. | was thinking ‘What on earth is going on?’

And my brother just said, ‘I realise we don’t spend enough

ime together, so I've gathered you all here and I’ve planned a
weekend for you.’ We're like ‘Oh, cool! So, what are we doing?’
‘I'm not telling you. ‘OK fine. Next thing we got on a boat and,
er, he took us out to a lighthouse. And the first night we spent,
er, eating Norwegian prawns drinking beer, and we slept in a
ighthouse. Next morning we got up, drove off in his car, we said,
‘Where are we going?’ He said, ‘I’m not telling you.’ He took us to

a local shopping centre and said, er, ‘I realise I've done OK in life.
I've done better than you guys. Here have a load of money. | want
you all to go shopping and buy stuff that you wouldn’t normally
buy with this money. He said, ‘The one condition is you're not
allowed to buy a gift for me or my family. So off we went in
different directions, spent all his money, and, er, bought some
very nice things, met back again. In the evening, he took us out
to a blues concert, then he took us for a five-course meal. And,
er, we stayed that night in a very nice hotel. The next morning we
had breakfast, | got back ona plane and went back to England.
Yeah, that weekend is one of my happiest memories.

WUnit7 es

P=Presenter |=lan

P: Hello and welcome back to the Focus podcast. I’m Jheni
Osman, the editor of Focus, the monthly science and technology
magazine from the BBC.

He’s the hugely influential author of Blink and The Tipping Point.
His work is quoted by academics, presidents and your mates
down the pub. And now Malcolm Gladwell has turned that deft
mind of his to a new subject: the science of success. In his new
book, w, Gladwell argues that if we want to be successful, we
should think less about what successful people are like, and
more about where they have come from and the opportunities
hey have had along the way. Now, lan’s read the book and he
joins me. Now ... his new book is looking at

SUCCESS ...
I: Yes, and what he says is, erm, that if we think about somebody
ike Bill Gates, hugely successful person, and we want to learn
rom, from his achievements, then what do we look at? We look
at what that man is like, you know, what drives him, what does
he do ona day-to-day basis, how can we be more like him?

Erm ... But what Gladwell argues in the new book is, is that we
should pay less attention to that side of stuff, and look at where
Bill Gates came from. So, how did he get to where he got to, the
opportunities he had along the way. Erm ... And what he says is
hat Bill Gates has one thing in common with another group of
very successful people, The Beatles.

P: So, what's that?

I: Well, they both practised what they do, and they practised a
ot.

P: Right, so how much is a lot?
I: A lot is ten thousand hours. That's like the magic number if
you're going to become world-class at anything in the world, you
need to put ten thousand hours’ practice in.
P: Oh, OK.

I: So, The Beatles, they, they were doing gigs, you know, like
all-night gigs in Hamburg, in these little clubs, and just the
number of hours that they put in on the stage, erm, allowed
them to master their craft ...
P: | think the ten thousand hours magic number is really
interesting because, as you know, | used to play tennis
professionally, and | hit a load of tennis balls when | was
younger. And I’m sure, | must have done ten thousand hours’
worth, you know, | must have done four hours a day, and stuff.
And | remember speaking to Martina Hingis’ mum about why
she thought her kid was so good, and such a prodigy, and she
basically said, ‘My daughter has been hitting tennis balls since
the age of three and she has hit X number of tennis balls for X
number of hours and it’s, you know, I’m sure she’s ... So once
you're over that magic number of ten thousand ... yeah.

I: The same goes for people like Beethoven, erm ... It's incredible
how ...

P: But at the end of the day you have to have talent.

I: You've got to have raw talent, you've got to have belief in what
you can do, and you have to have the will to put those hours in
... but you also need the opportunity.

--- PAGE 170 ---

funie a

T=Tim_ J=John P=Peggy

T: So what about your memory, Peggy? How good is it?

P: It’s OK, which is lucky ‘cos | need to remember lots of things.
J: Like what?

P: Well, I’m a sales rep for a publishing company so I’m usually
out visiting schools, trying to sell books.

J: So you need to remember ... what exactly?

P: Oh, lots of things. The worst thing when | started was just
trying to remember how to get to these schools in my car. | used
to get lost all the time. I’m not very good at directions. Then once
you're there you have to remember the names and faces of the
people you're talking to. | once spent a whole hour calling this
woman Sally when her name was Samantha.

T: And she didn’t tell you?

P: For some reason she didn’t tell me. And then there's all the
product information.

J: Product information? What, the books?

P: Yes. We sell about five hundred different books and | have to
know the difference between all of them. | mean, it gets easier,
thank goodness, but | still make mistakes occasionally. What
about you, John? You're an actor, right?

J: Yeah. The main thing | have to remember is my lines.
Fortunately, I’ve got a good memory for words, and | don’t find
it that hard to memorise them. So, | mean, yeah. The other thing
you have to remember when you're in the theatre is the blocking.
T: What's that?

J: Blocking? It's where you stand or move to, y’know? Like, when
you say your words you might have to walk quickly across the
stage. Or move in front of someone. It’s all planned and er, you
have to remember it.

T: Oh, | see.

J: But it’s funny: for, for other things | have a terrible memory. I’m
totally useless. | always forget birthdays and dates. I’m always
late for things. It’s just ... yeah ... luckily, I’m OK with my lines.
P: What about you, Tim?

T: I'm probably the same as all other students. At least all other
history students. | have to memorise dates and also names. But
it’s not that difficult because you read about them so much you
can't really forget them. But for other things | have a really bad
memory. | can never remember jokes or films. Sometimes I’m
watching a film and after an hour I realise I’ve seen it already. I’m
completely hopeless like that.

J: Oh, me too...

funit7 ca

M=Man W=Woman

M: It’s interesting: one of the most intelligent people | know is

a ten-year-old boy from Egypt. He doesn’t go to school and he
works in a touristy area in Cairo. And he sells things to tourists,
little souvenirs. Now, the reason | say he’s intelligent is that he
can sell you something in about fifteen languages. | once spent
an afternoon watching him, and it was incredible. Most of the
time he uses English, but he guesses where you're from and then
he starts speaking your language. For example, he can speak

a little bit of French, Spanish, Japanese, Italian, etcetera. It’s
amazing. He knows enough in all these languages to say hello
and sell you something.

W: How did he learn the languages?

M: | asked him that and he said he learnt them by talking to
tourists.
W: That's amazing. Just talking to people, you can learn so much.
M: So, like | said, he doesn’t go to school, but, for me, he’s super-
intelligent. Let me give you another example. | have a friend who
built his own house. He just taught himself how to do it: bought
some land, bought the materials and the equipment and just did
it. No qualifications, no certificates, no university degree.

W: In my view, that’s impressive. | couldn't do that.

M: This is someone who left school at fifteen to do an
apprenticeship.

W: Degrees and certificates aren’t everything, but, you know,
having said that, | do think qualifications are useful in some
ways. For one thing, they show that you're able to complete a
course — that you're motivated enough.

M: Yeah, | think that’s true.

W: But | must say real life experience, travelling and meeting
people ... these give you an amazing education, too.

M: Exactly. That's what | was saying. Like the boy from Egypt.

funit7 oe

A couple of years ago, er, | learnt how to scuba dive which was,
um, really exciting, really good experience and when you're
learning half of the, the training is in the classroom and half

is, er, a practical in a swimming pool. So the classroom stuff

was fine erm, | found it really quite easy. | was learning with my
mum and she was really worried about doing the kind of more
academic stuff and passing the exam but | found that part OK. It
was the practical stuff that | had trouble with and she was really
ucky, she was erm, really good. But you go and you learn all the
echnical stuff, you know how to go under water, how to clear
your mask if you get water in it, that kind of thing. And then

you have to do two dives outside in a, in a kind of reservoir or a
quarry or, you know, something like that. But obviously because
’m in the UK it was really, really cold and we woke up on the
morning of our dive and there was ice on the water so when

we got there we were very nervous and didn’t want to get into
he water. But once | was in it was so freezing that | tried to go
under the water but the more | tried the harder it got and then
got very frustrated and started to cry and then all my ears got
blocked up and | couldn't get under. But eventually | managed it
and erm, went down, passed my test, did all of the skills that you
need to do. Despite the fact that | was so terrible at it | managed
to pass and now, erm, now I’m passed | can go anywhere |

want so I'll make sure it will be somewhere very hot. So, erm,

o sum up, all, altogether it was a really difficult, really difficult
challenge, I’m so glad | managed it. Erm ... for me, it was quite
an achievement and, and I’m proud of myself for having done it.

Unit 8

Speaker 1

I'm in a band so | use the internet all the time just to promote
it. So, for example, we have to have a website. So | didn’t really
know anything about the internet but | absolutely have to. So
we've got a website and from there it links to things like Twitter
and Facebook and other social media. And then every time we
have a gig coming up we use it as a promotional tool: we can
send out newsletters by email to people that sign up to the
website and let them know what we’re doing and then when
we're actually in the process of a gig we'll, you know, put photos
online, post quotes talking about what we’re doing, so people
can see it, and then it usually leads, you know, from one to the
next person to the next person. They share it on their wall, for
example, or they'll post the photo, and it just means you can
reach a massive amount of people rather than, you know, the
old-fashioned way of just showing somebody a photo after the
event - that’s no good - so the internet's amazing for that. You
can just reach thousands really quickly, which is exactly our goal.

--- PAGE 171 ---

AUDIO SCRIPTS

Speaker 2

So, | have a food blog where | review restaurants and post up my
reviews onto this blog, just as a hobby. It’s something

| really enjoy doing, but it means | take a lot of photos of food.
You know, anything | eat | take a photo of it. So, for me, using
Instagram, which is social media for uploading photos, is the
perfect sort of tool for advertising my blog as it’s free and people
love looking through pictures of all the different dishes. So | find
that, you know, I've got about two ... over two thousand
followers just from people wanting to look at photos of a steak
or a piece of chicken, which sounds crazy, but it’s very popular, so
| use Instagram a lot to link up with my blog.

Speaker 3

Um, well | use Facebook, er, mainly because | work from home
and | don’t really chat to people much during the day so it's a
good way of ... of staying in touch with people. You know, it’s an
online community, isn’t it, and | like to keep in touch with people
that way — and you know old friends. Probably one of the best
uses, though, is organising parties and things because you can
just do one blanket invitation to everyone. Most people usually
get a notification on their email account to say they've been
invited to something, don’t they? So | think ... | think it’s really
handy. Rather than ringing up loads of people, you can do it all
through social media rather than making lots of phone calls. Um
but probably what | like most about it is um just seeing people’s
family photographs. Um people are always posting their ... their
... the pictures of their children or ... or you know ... parties or
friends and it’s just ... it’s just nice to, er ... it’s nice to see those
and keep in touch with people.

Unit 8

Conversation 1

A: I'm really hungry. Can | have some of this?
B: Help yourself.

Conversation 2
A: Come on in.
B: Thanks.

C: Have a seat.

Conversation 3

A: Hi.

B: What a day! I’m so tired!

A: I'll make you some coffee. Put your feet up.

Conversation 4

A: Can | just quickly use your phone?
B: Be my guest.

Conversation 5

A: Welcome!

B: Thank you. What a nice room.

A: Make yourself at home.

Unit 8

Conversation 1
W=Woman M=Man

W: Hi Dave. Sorry. Do you mind?

M: Sorry?

W: We don’t smoke in the house.

M: Oh, sorry about that. | didn’t know.
W: That's all right. It’s no problem.

Conversation 2

M1=1stman M2=2nd man

M1: So they've invited me to dinner at their home.

M2: Wonderful. And they're also from Morocco?

M1: The same as you. From Morocco.

M2: That'll be great.

M1: So, do | need to bring a dish? Like, bring some food?

M2: No, it’s not necessary. You can bring a small gift if you want
but you don’t need to bring food.

Conversation 3

M=Man W=Woman

M: Hello?

W: Hello?

M: Hi, I’m Richard Davies. From Exeter? I’m here to visit your
offices.

W: Ah hello.

M: I’m a bit early. Is this a bad time?

W: Umm.

M: | can come back later.

W: | wasn’t expecting you so early. Can you come back in ten
minutes? | just need to finish some work here, then I'll be able to
show you around.

M: Of course. Sorry about that.

W: Not at all. It’s fine.

Conversation 4

W1=1st woman We =2nd woman

W1: So, | walked into your parents’ house but | forgot to take my
shoes off. Did | do something wrong?

W2: Oh, | see.

W1: My shoes weren't dirty or anything but

I still felt really bad.

W2: It's OK - I'll tell my parents you forgot. Don’t worry about it.
W1: | don’t know. Should | call them up to apologise?

W2: No, it's nothing. You really don’t have to apologise.

Conversation 5

W=Waiter C=Customer

W: Excuse me sir, would you mind putting this on?

C: What?

W: Put on your jacket. In this restaurant you have to wear a jacket.
C: My apologies. | didn’t realise.

Conversation 6

W=Woman M=Man

W: So this American family are going to stay with us for
Thanksgiving.

M: For what?

W: For Thanksgiving. You know, people from the United States
celebrate it.

M: So what's the problem?

W: Americans always eat turkey on Thanksgiving, don’t they?
But we're vegetarians — we never eat meat. So, well, what should
we do?

M: Um... if | were you, I'd tell them the problem, and maybe
they can cook a turkey while you and your family just eat
something else.

--- PAGE 172 ---

Unit 8

B=Ben Jacques S = Sharon Hills

B: So Sharon, erm, imagine you had to start a brand new
community. Er...

S: Yes?

B: | know it’s a difficult question, but ideally where would it be?
S: Erm, I'd probably choose somewhere quite warm, so yeah, so
you didn’t have any issues of flooding, or you know, too much
snow to deal with something like that. And then I'd choose
another place most people would probably choose, not an island
erm...

B: Where ... where exactly?

S: But, | think, hmmmm ... somewhere in France, | don’t

know why.

B: Oh somewhere in France? OK and, and who would be there:
the French only or a mixture of people?

S: No, |... well, it would need to be a mix of people and they’d
need to be able to help one another.

B: In what way?

S: Well, erm ... I'd like to take one person who's an expert in one
field, another person who's an expert in another field, so you
have — you know — arty people, erm, manually skilled people, erm
... good orators, good writers.

B: Ah, so a whole range of skills ...

S: Exactly!

B: ... all going into the melting pot.

S: Yes, but, | wouldn’t have too many people to start with,
although if it’s too small a group then | suppose you risk, erm,
falling out. But | think if you keep that group fairly small to begin
with then you can draw up your own special laws, you know, to
govern yourselves.

B: Would it need laws do you think ... this, this utopian society?
S: Mmmm ... well, ideally there’d be no laws but because people
are human | think you would probably have to come up with
some ground rules yes.

B: What would be the most important one?

S: Oh! Erm, | think, erm ... not to physically hurt somebody else
| suppose.

B: Right, so pretty much like we have at the minute ...

S: Yes, | suppose ...

WUnit 9

Speaker 1

Yeah, | grew up in the nineties. Erm, for me film and music are
two important ah important aspects of my life, and it was a
fantastic decade for both of those. In terms of films, there were
some ah excellent ones that came out, erm, my favourites being
Forrest Gump, Pulp Fiction, and The Shawshank Redemption.

In terms of the music ... probably the most famous bands of
the time was Oasis and Blur. Ah, one of the most memorable
moments of the nineties was Euro ninety-six ... obviously the
football tournament. | was lucky enough to go to the opening
ceremony myself. Obviously, as we was entering the end of the
millennium the celebrations towards the end of the nineties
were huge as were the actual celebrations on the night.

Tony Blair was elected, erm, so he was the first sort of Labour
government for, for a long time. Um and also Mother Teresa
died, sort of Mother Teresa was, erm, the famous charitable
missionary.

o

Speaker 2

Ah, the seventies, well they were wonderful | think if, if I'm asked
were they was it a good decade or a bad decade, personally |
have to think it was a good decade to grow up in. | think it’s very
lucky | think of it as a very lucky experience when generally the
world that | lived in, which was London and England, which was
the post-war period and therefore an era of a certain amount of
erm, restriction was all ending and things were freeing up and

that happened just at the time that | was leaving home and
finding my own independence. It all seemed as though it
happened at the same time. Erm, technology was er, changing
and improving, um, everything seemed to be developing and
getting better in many ways. The fashion was getting rid of short
hair and regimented kind of looks, erm, individuality was very
much the order of the day. Great people were emerging in the
arts. John Lennon, for example, was an icon for me | think as a
creative artist with a message as well in his work. Great artists in
film, Scorsese: Taxi Driver, Spielberg: Duel these were emerging
artists of tremendous skill and artistry but they were just
starting out then when | was.

Speaker 3

| was a teenager in the eighties and | remember thinking that um
| didn’t like a lot of the fashion and the music from back then but
now it’s obvious in retrospect that | did quite like it. | love looking
back on like a nostalgia trip at the way we used to dress and how
much hair gel | used and how much hair spray the girls used.

and er, now in the 2000s there’s sort of a trip back into that time
you know, girls are wearing big earrings again and geometric
patterns of their clothes. Erm, the music in the eighties became
quite computerised sounding, quite electronic and er, disco
faded away, although we did still have soul although people

like Luther Vandross and Billy Ocean, erm, making soul music.

Er, New Romantic was another style that came out in the early
eighties where the men started wearing lots of make-up and had
big shoulders and small waists and erm, there was Madonna was
a big trendsetter for girls and er, at one point she cut her hair
really short in the mid eighties and almost like a boy’s, and then
all the girls started cutting their hair short, too. Erm, | wasn’t
very fashionable myself, | used to spend most of my money on
records not clothes. Erm, there were some good films around in
the eighties too things like Back to the Future with Michael J Fox,
Desperately Seeking Susan with Madonna, ET, Police Academy ...
Um, I’m gonna be forty this year and | reckon my birthday party
is going to be a big nostalgia trip back to the eighties.

JUnit9 Ee
M=Man W=Woman

M: So, yeah ... so question one. Um...

W: Yes about the religious leader, any ideas.

M: Yeah. Spoke out against racism in South Africa - worked as an
English teacher? Um ... no idea.

W: Well it could be a few different people couldn't it?

M: | have no idea. | ... | don’t know. | don’t know.

W: Want to guess?

M: If | was to guess ... oh, no | haven't a clue. | haven't. | haven't a
clue on this one. I’m sorry.

W: Okay I’m gonna tell you it was B- Desmond Tutu.

M: Oh, really?

W: Yes.

M: Oh no, | didn’t know that.

: Fair enough.

: | didn’t know that.

: All right. So the second one is about the politician being

illed by her own bodyguards.

: Well it’s definitely not A.

: Oh ... okay yes.

: Definitely not A, so... um
Can you remember?

: | can’t remember, I've forgotten.

; So you're just gonna have to guess.

Yes, um...

: Come on! I’m gonna press you now. If you used to know it, you
an have a go — it's in there somewhere.

: I’m gonna go for B.

W: Oh, no. It was the other one. It was C - Indira Gandhi.

M: Oh.

Sze

cam

ax [t'S|B oF'G. UM ss

--- PAGE 173 ---

174

AUDIO SCRIPTS

W: Never mind.

M: Oh well. | didn’t know that ... | didn’t know that.

W: Well there you go. Um ... so— number three, any ideas, uh,
about the anthropologist feeding bananas to wild chimpanzees?
ane Goodall, Louis ...?

; Louis Leakey, Margaret Mead.

Well. Well I’m sure it isn’t Margaret Mead.

: How about B?

Um, I'm ... I'm sure it isn’t ... I'm sure it isn’t B.

Okay.
So that leaves A.

: It leaves you with A. Very good. It was Jane Goodall.

: Yes, that’s right!

: Okay, and now the scientist ...

Which inspirational scientist spent his free time playing the
in?

: Free time ...

: ... when he wasn’t changing the world? Um,1...1... | think |
know this one.

W: Okay.

ae: | FT xs YORI: oes

W: Uh, be careful cos all of those ... changed the world.

M: I’m not a hundred per cent certain. I’m not a hundred per cent
certain, but it might be Albert Einstein.

W: Right, are you saying B?

M: B.

W: Yes, you're right.

M: Excellent.

W: And we're almost there, with number five, uh, the activist that
refused to give up the bus seat. You must remember this.

M: Oh no, | can’t remember.

W: You must!

M: Uh, its one of those things | used to know.

W: Start of the Civil Rights Movement.

M: | used to know but |... I’ve forgotten.

W: All right.

M: Che Guevara?

W: Sure?

M: No.

W: No.

M: But...

W: Okay it was C - Rosa Parks.

M: Ohl!

W: You're right. You didn’t remember.

M: Oh.

W: So the last one.

M: That's interesting. It’s interesting. Oh dear.

W: The last ... the last one then.

M: Right.

W: Um, which amazingly original and creative writer was banned
from the US for years?

W: Have you heard of them?

M: 1, ... |, well | know ... | know it wasn’t Charles Dickens.

W: Right.

M: So it’s one of the other two. Oh.

W: Go on. Have a guess.

M: I’m gonna go for C.

W: Good choice.

M: Ah! That's right, that’s right!

W: It was C!

M: Excellent! Excellent!

W: Well done. You did very well.

M: Yes, yeah not too bad.

SS3SE3E55E35255

=

JUnit ay

OK, well, someone whose work really influenced me is Gabriel
Garcia Marquez. | like his short stories, but | fell in love with his
novels, particularly One Hundred Years of Solitude. That book
really made its mark on me. Anyway, erm, well, Marquez is a
Colombian writer. | think he was born in 1928. He’s a Nobel Prize
winner — he won the Nobel Prize in Literature - and his books
have been translated into dozens of languages. Erm ... He’s one
of the best-known writers in the style of what's called magic
realism. This means he writes kind of realistically but there’s
magic, | mean magical things happen in his books, like ghosts
appear and kind of crazy things happen. I’m a big fan of that
ype of writing. Anyway, his novels are kind of funny but it’s black
humour or satire. He invents all these amazing, unforgettable
characters, like um, corrupt officials and devoted lovers, vicious
policemen and stupid revolutionaries, and through it all you're
aughing at the characters but you also see their world is falling
apart. | haven't read his work in Spanish, only English, erm, but
he style is brilliant. His dialogue is fast and funny and he writes
amazing descriptions of places and people. And, um, well, it

was finding Marquez’s work as a teenager that really made me
become a reader.

funit 10 one

Speaker 1

My favourite food city is ah, Hiroshima, in Japan... Um...
hmm ... Ah they've got all sorts of food. They've of course got
the really famous sushi that everyone thinks about when they
think of Japanese food, but they've got so much else to offer. Ah,
Hiroshima’s really famous for its okonomiyaki which is like a
cross between a pancake and a pizza ... and it’s kind of egg and
like a flour mixture with cabbage and noodles and meat and
sometimes cheese. It’s really good. One of my favourite
restaurants is a place called, ah, Daikichi, which specialises in
grilled chicken you can get grilled chicken with cheese, grilled
chicken with plum sauce, ah and a really good soup with rice and
ginger in it. I'd love to take you to Daikichi, you'd love it. They do
good beer, too. Erm, but also you can get tempura in Hiroshima,
which is like prawns and vegetables deep fried ina really light,
fluffy batter ... it’s really good. And then, ah, you have also the
informal restaurants that are called Izakaya where you go with a
group of friends and you order lots of dishes and everyone
shares and eats from the middle of the table so it’s a great way
to try lots of different kinds of food. Actually | know a really good
Izakaya that | should take you to.

Speaker 2

Well, my favourite food city would be Madrid. | lived in Madrid, in
Spain for around ten years on and off and the quality of the food
is, is wonderful - it's sensational. Spanish people always say that,
ah, Spanish food is the best in the world and | always argued
while | lived there, that, er, | felt there was a lot more variety of
ood in the UK, but when | moved back to the UK | really started
to miss the richness, the quality of food in Spain. | think my
avourite restaurant in Spain was a tiny little, um, Galician which
is a part in the north west of Spain, seafood restaurant in a small
ittle bar, it was a very, it wasn’t posh or expensive, it was cheap
and basic but just served the most wonderful seafood followed
by lots of white wine and er, a great Tarta de Santiago, a great
pastry dessert, afterwards. Another great thing, obviously about
Spanish food which you'll’ve heard of is ‘tapas’ where everyone
gets together on a Sunday lunchtime before lunch to have a few
bites to eat and, and a few beers together and it’s a lovely social
atmosphere and it’s nice to go out and try a variety of different
ood. | tried once, ah, pig's ear, which | have to say was possibly
he worst thing I’ve ever tasted, but generally the quality was
sensational.

--- PAGE 174 ---

Conversation 1

W=Woman M=Man

W: Is there anything | should know for when | arrive at the
airport?

M: Yes, watch out for the taxi drivers who tend to hang around
outside the airport. Most of them aren't licensed, so you
shouldn't really use them.

W: OK.

M: If you do use one, make sure you find out how much the
journey is supposed to cost. Don’t get in until you've agreed the
price with the driver, or else you could find that you have to pay
three or four times the amount you should pay for the journey.
W: Oh right. That's good to know.

Conversation 2

M=Man W=Woman

M: Hi- I’m going to Heathrow tomorrow, and my plane leaves at
three p.m. Latest check in time is 1.40. What time do you think |
should leave central London?

W: For Heathrow? Well, you'd better leave plenty of time,
because often there are delays on the tube. Are you going on the
tube or the train?

M: The tube, | think.

W: The tube? If | were you, I'd allow about an hour and a half. So,
if you want to be at the airport at 1.30 ... then you'd better leave
at about twelve o'clock.

M: OK. That's great. Thanks.

Conversation 3

M1=1stman M2=2nd man

M1: Be careful when you take trips into the jungle in the north.
Generally, there are a lot of mosquitoes there, so remember to
take mosquito nets, and insect cream. It’s a good idea to wear
long trousers, and shirts with sleeves in the evening. And don’t
forget to take your malaria tablets.

M2: Oh yes, | must remember those.

M1: And whatever you do, don’t drink the water, or you'll get a
bad stomach.

M2: Oh, | didn’t know that.

M1: Yes, always be sure to boil the water first, or drink bottled
water. You have to be careful when you eat raw food, too, like
fruit, if it’s been washed in water.

M2: OK.

Conversation 4

W1=1st woman W2 = 2nd woman

W1: We're going there on holiday, and I’ve heard that there's a
lot of street crime. Is that true?

W2: Not really no. | mean, it’s like any big city. You need to watch
out for groups of young children on the streets. They try to
distract you, and then sometimes take your bag.

W1: Oh. Right.

Wa2: It's not very common, but don’t walk around the city
obviously carrying money in a big money belt or anything.

W1: Of course.

W2: The most important thing is to remember to hold on to your
handbag, and things like that, but no, there isn’t really much
crime. On the whole, it’s a pretty safe city.

W1: That's useful, thanks.

funie10 cee

One place that | think everyone should have the chance to see is
Venice. But the problem is that this beautiful and charming city
is slowly sinking. Ever since the fourteenth century engineers
have tried to work out a way to stop the floods in Venice, but

so far nobody has managed. Sometimes there are as many

as forty floods per year between March and September, and
Venice is actually sinking at a rate of two and a half inches every
decade. It’s very possible that your grandchildren, and their
grandchildren will never have the chance to see this fragile city.
Everyone should have the chance to enjoy the city, to walk across
its famous bridges, through its ancient squares. There are no
cars in Venice, and many people think it helps this to be one of
the most romantic cities in the world. So, can it be saved?

Well, they are trying. Barriers are being put in to try and stop the
water getting too high. This is viewed as a temporary measure,
although they should last a hundred years, so the problem is
finding a permanent solution. If you want my advice, go there
while you still can, and then together we can put pressure

on the government to spend the money it needs to finda
permanent way to keep this beautiful and historic city for future
generations. We have an opportunity now to save this city, and
we must, before it’s too late.

175

--- PAGE 175 ---

Pearson Education Limited

Edinburgh Gate

Harlow

Essex CM20 2JE

England

and Associated Companies throughout the world.

www.pearsonelt.com
© Pearson Education Limited 2015

The right of Antonia Clare and JJ Wilson to be identified
as authors of this Work has been asserted by them in
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents
Act 1988.

All rights reserved; no part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise without the prior
written permission of the Publishers.

First published 2015
ISBN: 978-1 -292-| 1594-8

Set in Aptifer sans 10/12 pt
Printed in Slovakia by Neografia

Acknowledgements

The Publisher and authors would like to thank the
following people and institutions for their feedback and
comments during the development of the material:
Australia: Erica Lederman; Hungary: Eszter Timér;
Mexico: Hortensia Camacho Barco; Poland: Konrad
Dejko; Spain: Sam Lanchbury, Victoria O'Dea; UK: Lilian
Del Gaudio Maciel, Joelle Finck, Niva Gunasegaran.

Text acknowledgements
We are grateful to the following for permission to
reproduce copyright material:
Extract on page 25 from ‘Fraud Fugitive in Facebook
Trap", 14/10/2009, httpy//news.bbc.co.uk/ | /hi/world/
americas/8306032.stm, copyright © BBC Worldwide
Limited; Extracts on pages 37, 70, 161 from Longman
Active Study Dictionary, 5th edition, Pearson Education
Ltd, copyright © Pearson Education Limited, 201 0;
Extract on page 44 from ‘Millionaires prefer Gap
to Gucci" 05/10/2003, http:/Awww.bbc.co.uk/print/
pressoffice/pressreleases/stories/2003/10_october/05/
mind_millionaire.shtm|, copyright © BBC Worldwide
Limited; Extract on pages 44-45 from “Have you
Got What it Takes to be Millionaire ?”, The Telegraph,
05/06/2014 (Shirley Conran), copyright © Telegraph
ledia Group Limited; Extract on page 80 adapted
from ‘The secret of success’ interview with Malcolm
Gladwell, BBC Focus, Issue 197, 01/12/2008, p.23.
Presenters Jenny Osman & lan, copyright © Immediate
ledia Company Bristol Ltd; Extract on page 105
rom ‘12. Giant leaps for mankind” by Rob Attar, BBC
History Magazine, Vol.10, no.7, pp.42-47, copyright ©
Immediate Media Company Bristol Ltd; Extract on
pages | 16-117 adapted from “I am the Ethical Man" by
22/02/2006 and ‘We are all ethical men and women
now" 13/04/2007 by Justin Rowlatt, http//news.bbc.
co.uk/ | /hi/programmes/newsnight/4736228.stm, http://
wwwobbc.co.uk/blogs/newsnight/2007/04/we_are_all_
ethical_men_and_women_now.html, copyright © BBC
Worldwide Limited; and Extract on page 121 adapted
from ‘Top Ten New Restaurants in East London”,
Traveller, 09/05/2013, source: http://www.cntraveller:
com/recommended/food/top- | 0-new-restaurants-
east-london/viewall. Reproduced with permission from
Conde Nast.

Illustration acknowledgements

Fred Blunt: 29, 66, 90, 159, 160; Lyndon Hayes: 26, 27,
74, 75; Eric Smith: 129, 133, 135, 137, 140, 149, 150,
151, 152, 153, 154, 157.

Photo acknowledgements
The Publisher would like to thank the following for their
kind permission to reproduce their photographs:

(Key: b-bottom; c-centre; |-left; rright; t-top)

123REcom: |23vector 37 (car), 86br, agencyby 84/8,
Diego Alies 37 (Book), andersonrise 148 (young girl

with brown hair), AnnSunnyDay 37, Andrey Bayda 44tl,
Jacek Chabraszewski 148 (young girl), Brian Eichhorn
|48r (grandma), Elena Elisseeva 148 (son), Warren
Goldswain 148 (mature man ), Gabriel Gonzalez |21,
goodluz 148 (father), Paul Michael Hughes 148 (young
boy), hor Obraztsov 46r, jehsomwang 37 (wind ),
kritchanut | 16-117 (background), Kurhan 148 (aunty),
148 (uncle), lammeyer | 48 (mother), Lightwave
Stock Media 321, lightwise | 17t, Roman Malyshev 37
(microscope), nazlisart 37 (Flag ), Sean Nel 84/9, nyul
148 (brother), 148 (cousin), 148 (husband), Photoroad
8-9 (background), Aigars Reinholds 148 (grandpa),
rido 148 (man), robinsphoto | 48 (young woman ),
serezniy 84/1, Dmitriy Shironosov |48 (daughter ),
Andrei Shumskiy 7b (icon), | 9b (icon), 3 1b (icon), 43b
(icon ), 55 (icon), 67b (icon), 79b (icon), 91b (icon),
103b (icon), | 15b (icon), sima 148 (grandma), Eric
Simard 148 (ME), sjenner|3 96, David Smith 43r, 52-53
(balloon), Eunika Sopotnicka 33, stylephotographs | 48
(mother-in-law), tetyanka 45 (car), veralub 84/3 (a),
Mikhail Vorobiev | 2b, Wavebreak Media Ltd 71, 8c,
Cameron Whitman 148 (sister), 148 (young man) , Lisa
Young |48r (grandpa); Alamy Images: Vincent Abbey
87b, ableimages 48t, Agencja Fotograficzna Caro 94br,
Arterra Picture Library 157/1, Anatolii Babii 62/C, Peter
Barritt |03r, Creation of Adam fresco on the ceiling of
the Sistine Chapel by Buonarroti Michelangelo Vatican
Museum Rome Italy Europe | | 2-1 13b, Blend Images
59 (F), Catchlight Visual Services 9 | cr, 98tr, Cultura
Creative (RF) 48b, Cultura RM 60, culture-images
GmbH 65b, David J. Green - lifestyle 2 9 1c, Deborah
Ernest 61, Everett Collection Historical 1031, Garry
Gay 431, lan Goodrick 55cr, 62/B, Tim Graham | | Obl,
Thierry Grun 87c, Heritage Image Partnership Ltd
104c, Images-USA | 17 (bus), Isowork Images 62/E,
Eddie Linssen 151, LondonPhotos / Homer Sykes
108tr, M. Timothy O'Keefe 62/D, David Pearson | | Otr,
Davide Piras 43cl, 47/C, Pixellover RM 8 97, StreetStock
67d, 71, The Illustrated London News Picture Library.
Ingram Publishing. Alamy | |Obr, Gregg Vignal 10; BBC
Photo Library: Hladik, Martin 36, BBC Worldwide
Ltd: 16 (inset), 28 (inset ), 40 (inset ), 52I (inset), 55r, 64
(inset), 76 (inset), 100 (inset ), |24r (inset); Comstock
Images: 99; Corbis: 68 / Ocean 25 (background), 25cl,
Amelie-Benoist / Bsip 3 It, Andersen Ross / Cultura
52-53, Bettmann 23b, 8 !tr, |03cr, Edgar Su / Reuters
351, Hemant Mehta / India Picture 87t, Jon Hrusa / Epa
24, Ingo Bartussek / Westend61 50r, Lan 80t, LWA /
Larry Williams | 6-17, Photo Media 671, Photo Media /
Classicstock | 081, Arnie Sachs / CNP / AdMedia | 041;
Fotolia.com: | | 8, arphoto 44 (notes), Banana Republic
44-45 (background), Andrey Burmakin 79cr, Cifotart
80-81 (background), cunico 38tr, dominiquelavoie |5 1c,
Dp3010 76 (cake), Esolla 77 (flowers), Eyematrix 56
(background), Fontanis 84/6, Joe Gough 84/1 1, Kaesler
Media 381, karandaev 84/10, Login | 10 (background),
Monkey Business 38r, nacroba 67cr, photorealistic
51, Zeljko Radojko 44 (watch), Raven 38 (food icon),
Robsonphoto 76-77 (heart background), Maksim
Striganov 44 (ring), sumnersgraphicsinc 77 (cork),
surasaki 76-77 (flower background), Taiga 67r; Getty
Images: 68/C, | | 2-1 | 3t, Frank Barratt |03cl, BBC News
& Current Affairs / Jeff Overs | 1 61, Al Bello / Staff 88-89
(background), Bilderlounge 3 | cr, 38tc, Fotog 59/C, FPG
67t, George Hoyningen-Huene / RDA / Contributor 21
(F), Jeff Giniewicz 3 |r, 40-41, Tim Graham | 63, Judith
Haeusler 56b, Hero Images 34b, 47/A, Stan Honda /
Staff 79r, 88-89 (foreground), iStock / Getty Images Plus
35c, Vincenzo Lombardo | |5cr, Massive 68/A, Buda
lendes 9 |t, Tatiana Morozova 69/E, Zhang Peng | | 9r,
Philip Game / Lonely Planet Images 9 |r, 100-101, Photo
12 1 10tl, Photonica World | | 5cl, 1191, Tom C. Robison
43t, Terry Fincher 107, Westend6! 68/B; Nicola Krebill:
56t; NASA: NASA / JPL/ ASU 95; Pearson Education
Ltd: Sophie Bluy 63; Photolibrary.com: Sugar Gold
mages. Denkou Images 68/D; Plainpicture Ltd: Julian
Love / Cultura 43cr; Press Association Images: Fiona
Hanson 65cr; Reuters: Chip East 161, Dylan Martinez
7%; Rex Features: |9cl, 2! (B), 21 (G), 23t, 52r (inset),
80cr, 80bl, 104% Agencia EFE | 10cl, Ron C Angle 80br,
Stuart Clarke | |Ocr, Cultura 84/3 (b), Cultura / REX
32r, Design Pics Inc 7r, | 6b, Everett Collection 21 (D),
Love Images | |5I, ITV || 1, Keystone USA-ZUMA
81tl, Franck Leguet 2! (A), Geraint Lewis 83b, Steve
leddle / ITV 72, Scott Myers 21 (C), Niviere / Villard
21 (6), PictureGroup 791, Brian Rasic |O8br, Ron Sachs
/ Pool via CNP 21 (H), Solent News 47/B, Universal

History Archive / Universal Images Group 8 | bl, 8! br,
WestEnd6! 98tl; Robert Harding World Imagery:
Nick Bonetti 93, Fernanda Preto 94cl, P Schickert 911,
92; Science Photo Library Ltd: Amelie-Benoist / Bsip
35r, David A. Hardy 3 | cl; Shutterstock.com: Oéphoto
122, 48c (butterfly), auremar 86tr, bikeriderlondon
86tl, Franck Boston 84/12, Andrey Burmakin |03t,
damato 84/7, Zeynep Demir | 9t, EpicStockMedia
S9/E, Greg Epperson 84/5, FloridaStock || 5r, 124-125,
Stanimir G.Stoev 44 (coins), Jaroslaw Grudzinski 76
(rings/rose), InesBazdar | 9cr, Inga Ivanova |5 |b, Shaun
Jeffers 64-65, Christopher Kolaczan |57/5, Olivier Le
Queinec |05r,M. Shcherbyna 157/2, mhatzapa 84/4
(b), Monkey Business Images 73, Vladimir Mucibabic
69/F, nobeastsofierce 104-105, Olllyy | 2t, Pakhnyushcha
49, pixeldreams.eu 79cl, 83 (background), Graham
Prentice 59/D, RG-vc 55cl, Rido 84/4 (a), robcocquyt
62/A, Sailorr 59/A, Sozaijiten 59/B, Ssuaphotos |57/3,
Dan Thornberg | |7 (flag), Three one five 157/4,
Tupungato 94bl, Kiselev Andrey Valerevich 84/2, Roman
Vanur | | 5t, Wavebreakmedia 3 ||, Chamille White 55t,
Zurijeta SOI; SuperStock: Blend Images 98tc, Cultura
Limited 7t, Cultura Ltd |4b, Cusp / Cusp | 9r, 28-29, Fl
Online |4t, RubberBall 7cr, Science Photo Library 7cl,
Il, | lr; The Kobal Collection: Warner Bros. / James,
David 191, TopFoto: 2005 155, Ronald Grant Archive /
ArenaPAL 23c; www.playpumps.co.za: 551, 56c

All other images © Pearson Education

Every effort has been made to trace the copyright
holders and we apologise in advance for any
unintentional omissions. We would be pleased to insert
the appropriate acknowledgement in any subsequent
edition of this publication.