

--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---



--- PAGE 3 ---



--- PAGE 4 ---



--- PAGE 5 ---



--- PAGE 6 ---



--- PAGE 7 ---



--- PAGE 8 ---



--- PAGE 9 ---



--- PAGE 10 ---



--- PAGE 11 ---



--- PAGE 12 ---



--- PAGE 13 ---



--- PAGE 14 ---



--- PAGE 15 ---



--- PAGE 16 ---



--- PAGE 17 ---



--- PAGE 18 ---



--- PAGE 19 ---



--- PAGE 20 ---



--- PAGE 21 ---



--- PAGE 22 ---



--- PAGE 23 ---



--- PAGE 24 ---



--- PAGE 25 ---



--- PAGE 26 ---



--- PAGE 27 ---



--- PAGE 28 ---



--- PAGE 29 ---



--- PAGE 30 ---



--- PAGE 31 ---



--- PAGE 32 ---



--- PAGE 33 ---



--- PAGE 34 ---



--- PAGE 35 ---



--- PAGE 36 ---



--- PAGE 37 ---



--- PAGE 38 ---



--- PAGE 39 ---



--- PAGE 40 ---



--- PAGE 41 ---



--- PAGE 42 ---



--- PAGE 43 ---



--- PAGE 44 ---



--- PAGE 45 ---



--- PAGE 46 ---



--- PAGE 47 ---



--- PAGE 48 ---



--- PAGE 49 ---



--- PAGE 50 ---



--- PAGE 51 ---



--- PAGE 52 ---



--- PAGE 53 ---



--- PAGE 54 ---



--- PAGE 55 ---



--- PAGE 56 ---



--- PAGE 57 ---



--- PAGE 58 ---



--- PAGE 59 ---



--- PAGE 60 ---



--- PAGE 61 ---



--- PAGE 62 ---



--- PAGE 63 ---



--- PAGE 64 ---



--- PAGE 65 ---



--- PAGE 66 ---

AUDIOSCRIPTS
UNIT 1
Audio 1.01
1 Nine times out of ten, she’ll forget her bank card. 
2 We’d spend hours sitting in a café, just chatting. 
3 She’d always fi nd the perfect birthday present for me. 
4 He’ll always o ff er to pay for my lunch. 
5 We’d see each other every weekend. 
6 She’ll accept an invitation and then change her mind. 
7 I’ll always give my honest opinion. 
8 They’d meet up every evening. 
Audio 1.02
Hello, and welcome to the show. Today we’re talking about 
researching your family history. Looking into your family’s past 
has become a popular hobby and there are lots of websites you 
can use to help you trace your family tree back hundreds of years. 
So, today, we want to hear from you. Have you delved into the 
past and found long-lost secrets about family members? What 
appeals to you about researching your family’s history and how 
does it feel when you succeed or fail? Or does the whole idea 
leave you cold? Call us now and join in the conversation.
Audio 1.03 and 1.04
P = Presenter D = Dan iel A = Anita R = Rafael
P: Our fi rst caller is Daniel. Hello! What’s your experience?
D: Well, I was never interested in family history. I used to think, 
‘Why would I want to know about people just because they’re 
distantly related to me?’ A friend of mine who used to be 
really into this would o ft en say, ‘I’ve been doing some family 
research and you’ll never guess what I’ve found out!’ I’d think, 
‘Wonderful. No doubt you’re going to tell me all about it … in 
great detail!’
P: So, what changed your mind?
D: Well, one day my mum mentioned a relative of ours – her 
uncle – that no one really knew much about. He was a bit of a 
mystery and it kind of got me curious. 
P: Of course!
D: So, I started doing a bit of digging around online and the more I 
did, the more interested I got. I started asking family members 
for old photos and it was surprising what connections between 
the past and the present I found, like Great Uncle Silas used 
to look incredibly like my brother does now. So, yeah, I’m really 
into it now. It’s a bit like doing a jigsaw puzzle. Once you start, 
you can’t stop until all the pieces are in place!
P: Brilliant! I’m glad you’re enjoying it. Now, Anita’s on the line. 
What’s your story?
A: Well, I always got on well with my grandparents, but a ft er 
they died, I realised I didn’t know much about their early lives. 
I asked my mum and she didn’t really know much about them 
either – so that was helpful!
P: Oh, dear.
A: Yeah. But I knew they were originally from the Netherlands, 
so I thought I’d try and fi nd out more about them. What I 
didn’t know was that their name, De Jong, is one of the most 
common Dutch surnames. When I did a search for that name, 
I got over 5,000 results! Great, I thought! How am I going to 
work my way through all these?
P: Wow! What did you do?
A: I tried some family history websites, but that didn’t get me 
very far. Then I read about someone who’d researched their 
family history and found some unpleasant facts about their 
family members and I thought, ‘Do I really want to risk fi nding 
out something bad?’
P: Hmm, yeah.
A: So, in the end I decided I’d treasure the memories I have of my 
grandparents and not try to dig up the past.
P: Yeah, I can understand that! Well, thanks for calling. Next up is 
Rafael, who’s a very keen family historian, I think? 
R: Yes, but for me, it isn’t to do with learning more about 
the past. It’s about fi nding connections in the present. My 
family’s quite small – I’ve got just one brother and a couple of 
cousins. Then a friend told me they’d done their family tree 
and discovered loads of relatives they didn’t know about and 
I thought, ‘I wonder if I’ve got any long-lost relatives?’ Two 
years later … I’ve found I’ve actually got family all over the 
world – from Australia to Canada.
P: Fantastic! And have you made contact with them?
R: Yeah. I’ve met up with quite a few. It’s surprising, because I’ve 
met people who are from quite di ff erent backgrounds, have 
very di ff erent opinions and so on. But also, we have a lot of 
things in common. I’ve been able to bond with them because 
we share more or less the same family tree and feel a sense of 
belonging. It’s amazing!
Audio 1.05
1 No doubt you’re going to tell me all about it!
2 I started doing a bit of digging around online.
3 I knew they were originally from the Netherlands.
4 I’ve found I’ve actually got family all over the world.
Audio 1.06
1 We live on the outskirts of the city.
2 She’s studying architecture at university.
3 Most people live in inner-city areas.
4 The offi ce block has been fully modernised.
Audio 1.07
1 A:  Have you heard about Okas? He’s doing a bungee jump o ff a 
tower block next month!
 B:  Really? I guess some people enjoy the adrenaline rush, but 
you wouldn’t catch me doing it! 
2 A: You know Rob’s really into kitesur fing?
 B: Yeah.
 A: Well, he’s asked me to go with him next weekend.
 B: Really? I’d jump at the chance to do that!
3 A:  What do you fancy doing tomorrow? We could go shopping, 
or just have a lazy day.
 B:  Oh, that’s easy. Given the choice, I’d go for the lazy day.
4 A: Are you going to volunteer to give a talk at the open day?
 B: Are you kidding? I’d run a mile at the thought of speaking in 
front of lots of people!
5 A: We haven’t got anything planned for Friday evening. Would 
you rather go to the cinema, or watch a movie at home?
 B: Watching a movie at home’s OK, but I’d sooner go to the 
cinema. The big screen de finitely adds to the experience.
6 A: Are you going to join in the dance competition? You’re really 
good at dancing!
 B: Dancing’s OK, but I think I’ll give it a miss. I’m not really that 
competitive.
Audio 1.08
1 I’d rather not be too late home tonight.
2 Given the choice, I’d go for an Italian meal.
3 I’d sooner save up and go for a longer holiday next summer.
4 I’d prefer a room at the back of the hotel, where it’s quieter.
5 I think I’d rather ask for professional advice fi rst.
6 I’d prefer to stay in tonight.
Audio 1.09 and 1.10
A: Right. We’ve three days here in Paris and there are loads of 
things to do. What do you fancy doing fi rst? We could go to 
the Louvre Museum, or would you rather look around the city?
B: I’d go for your second choice, to get to know the city a bit.
A: OK. There are tour buses. We could hop on one of those, or 
would you prefer to walk?
B: Given the choice, I’d walk. I think you notice more that way. 
Also, it’s a lovely sunny day.
A: Oh, look at this – we could do a helicopter tour of the city! Do 
you fancy that?
B: I think I’d probably give that a miss. You know I’m scared of 
fl ying. There’s no way I’d enjoy being up in a helicopter!
Audio 1.11
P = Presenter A = A manda
P: Last week we were talking about comfort foods and, of 
course, one food that kept coming up was chocolate. So, 
I thought we’d explore this a bit further and ask, ‘Why do 
we like chocolate so much?’ With me is food chemist and 
self-confessed chocoholic Amanda Greyson. Amanda, tell 
us … Has chocolate always been regarded as a luxury food, 
something we treat ourselves to?
A: No. In fact, the first people who are known to have consumed 
cocoa beans did so in the form of a drink, which was made from 
68

--- PAGE 67 ---

AUDIOSCRIPTS
controlling you – that’s what auction fever is. And that’s why 
statistically people pay more on auction sites than they would 
in normal online stores.
B: Not always, surely!
A: No, but it happens a lot. I’ve been studying it as part of my 
psychology degree. Let’s see the photo of the trainers. Yeah, 
look. It’s a really attractive picture and you’ve been focusing 
on it for what? Nearly an hour? So, in your mind, you already 
own these trainers. 
B: Yeah, I can see myself wearing them.
A: So, the way it works is that we tend to value things we already 
have more than things we don’t have. So, because in your mind 
you already own the trainers, you’re willing to pay more for 
them than you would if you were just browsing in a normal 
store.
B: Hmm. Yeah, I can see that. You start to want the thing more.
A: Exactly. And another thing is – look. There’s only one pair here, 
but in a normal store there’d be loads. Again, our minds trick 
us and we tend to think things are more valuable if we think 
they might run out. 
B: Wow. That’s so interesting and it really makes sense. Oh, no! 
Someone else has o ff ered more than me. That’s so annoying!
A: Ah, and that’s the fi nal way that auctions make us bid in an 
irrational way – they make us compete! And when we start 
competing, we want to win. You’re now in the situation where 
you don’t want to lose to whoever just made that bid. So you 
bid more – more than the trainers are worth, just so you can 
come out on top! 
B: That’s crazy! So, what should I do? Look, there’s only a few 
minutes le ft ! You have to admit, they’re pretty smart trainers!
A: Yeah, but if you start to think rationally again, you’ll realise 
that you can probably get a similar pair for less from a 
standard store, if you just wait for the sales.
B: Oh, it’s so hard to stop! But you’re right. OK. I’ll close the app. 
There – done! 
Audio 2.03
1 There are only ten minutes of bidding time le ft . 
2 The problem is, this stops you making rational decisions.
3 That’s so interesting and it really makes sense.
4 You have to admit, they’re pretty smart trainers.
Audio 2.04
1 I hope I can be successful and ful fil my potential. 
2 We should form an alliance with our rivals.
3 I think I really pushed beyond my limits last year.
4 These new products will help us gain a competitive edge.
Audio 2.05
1 For me, money is nowhere near as important as having a good 
quality of life. And that means time o ff ! What’s the point in 
working more and more if you can’t go on holiday and enjoy 
yourself? Being able to do the things I want is in finitely more 
appealing to me than just earning more money. So I’d always 
go for a bonus scheme that o ff ers me additional holidays if I 
meet my targets.
2 I’ve got young kids, and my family is every bit as important to 
me as my career. So regular pay rises are great, but for me, 
fl exible working hours are invaluable for managing work and 
home commitments, so that would de finitely top my list.
3 My dad keeps telling me that a pension scheme is really 
important. But I think focusing too much on the future is a waste 
of time for me, as I’m only in my twenties. At my stage of life, 
more immediate perks are way more attractive than ones I won’t 
benefit from for forty years. I’d definitely benefit immediately 
from regular pay rises, as they’d mean I’d automatically get more 
money each year!
Audio 2.06
1 It’s way better to work in a team than on your own.
2 The job is nothing like as interesting as I’d hoped.
3 His bonus is almost as much as his salary!
4 This new job is signi ficantly more senior than my old one.
5 My new manager is slightly more fl exible than my previous one.
6 We’re just as busy as we were last year.
ground cocoa beans and it was quite spicy, and quite b itter 
because it had no sugar added. It was seen as having health 
benefits  and it was also thought to help people live longer. 
P: So, when did it turn into chocolate as we know it?
A: It was the Spanish in the 1600s who fi rst added honey and 
sugar to make it into a rich, sweet drink and at some point milk 
was also added, but the fi rst chocolate bars didn’t appear until 
the 1840s, in Belgium.
P: So, relatively recently. 
A: Yes, and in fact the fi rst chocolate bars had quite a rough 
texture. It was only in the 1870s that a Swiss chocolatier found 
a way to add more cocoa butter into the mix to produce the 
chocolate we know today, with that delicious creamy texture 
that melts on the tongue.
P: Mmm, yes. OK, so that’s the history. But what about the 
chemistry? Is it possible to say what exactly it is that makes 
chocolate so pleasurable to eat?
A: Well, the sweetness, of course. Sweet foods are naturally 
appealing, and this helped us in our evolutionary past. Sugary 
foods such as fruit allowed us to take in extra food in the 
autumn and store it as fat through the winter.   
P: So, we’re more or less programmed to like sweet food …
A: That’s right. But chocolate also contains a lot of natural 
chemicals that stimulate the brain and give us energy. Then, 
added to that is the fact that, in Europe and the US at least, 
chocolate has always been seen as a treat, especially for 
children, so when we eat chocolate as adults, the smell and 
fl avour probably remind us of happy feelings from the past.
P:  So, that would explain why it’s the comfort food of choice for 
so many people. 
A: Yes, de finitely. And the fi nal secret ingredient is the ratio of fat 
to sugar. So, if you look at most chocolate bars, you’ll see that 
they are around twenty to twenty- five percent fat and forty 
to fift y percent sugar. That’s quite an unusual combination in 
natural foods. Foods that are naturally sweet, such as fruit, 
don’t tend to have much fat and foods that are naturally fatty 
or greasy, such as meat, don’t tend to be sweet. But the one 
natural food that does contain this exact same ratio of fat to 
sugar is milk, which is of course the very fi rst thing we taste 
aft er we’re born.
P: That’s so interesting. 
A: So it’s been suggested that the appeal of chocolate as a 
comfort food is that it stimulates memories of those fi rst few 
weeks of life, when we were comforted with milk. 
UNIT 2
Audio 2.01
1 What he did was deny all the allegations of cheating.
2 What some students do is write exam notes on their hands.
3 What we suspect is that he somehow had access to the internet.
4 What they were doing was checking all the students’ ID cards 
carefully.
5 What she forgot was that she hadn’t switched her phone to 
silent.
Audio 2.02
A: You’ve been on your phone for ages. And you seem really 
tense. What are you doing?
B: I’m trying to buy this pair of trainers that I really like.
A: So, just choose your size, pay for them and …
B: No, you don’t understand. They’re on an auction site – that’s 
why I’m tense! There are only ten minutes of bidding time le ft . 
I’ve got a good chance of getting them. I just need to make sure 
no one off ers more than I do.
A: Oh, I never go on auction sites. 
B: Why? You can get some real bargains. Plus, it’s really exciting 
to compete and try to buy something that other people want.
A: Ah, but that’s the problem – the excitement!
B: What do you mean?
A: It’s called ‘auction fever’.
B: What is?
A: The feeling of excitement you get when you’re bidding for 
something. I can tell you’re really tense now. That’s because 
you’re caught up in the auction process and … the problem is, 
this stops you making rational decisions.
B:  But the only decision I’ve made is that I want the trainers.
A: Yeah, but now, with only ten minutes to go, you’re not thinking 
rationally about how much you should pay. Your emotions are 
69

--- PAGE 68 ---

AUDIOSCRIPTS
Audio 3.02
1 You’ll be OK, no matter what happens. 
2 No matter how hard I try, I never seem to win! 
3 It doesn’t matter if it rains. 
4 Everyone can enjoy tennis, no matter how old they are. 
5 He’s determined to leave his job, no matter what I say. 
6 No matter how o ft en I tidy up, this place always seems a mess.
Audio 3.03
F = Freddie C = C arrie
F: Hey, Carrie. Can I pick your brains about something?
C: Sure, Freddie. What is it?
F: Well, I’ve joined this debating society and I’ve got to give a 
talk about why it’s important for the government to promote 
creativity and fund the arts. Can you just help me think things 
through with it?
C: Sure, although … I don’t agree that the government should 
fund the arts.
F: Really? Why not? 
C: Because it seems such a low priority, when you set it against 
all the really vital things that governments have to fi nance, like 
education, health, roads and railways … all kinds of things that 
make such a diff erence to people’s lives.
F: Yeah, but surely the arts are just as important? I mean, you 
could argue that creativity and self-expression are just as 
necessary as practical things like roads or railways. 
C: Go on then. Why do you think it’s necessary to have art 
galleries?
F: Because art helps us make sense of our lives. It creates a 
record of our society, of the issues that a ff ect us. Take climate 
change, for example. A single work of art can convey a 
message about climate change much more clearly and boldly 
than anyone could do in hundreds of words, because it does 
it visually. And it conveys the message in a way that stirs our 
emotions, so it inspires us. We feel the message as well as 
understand it logically.
C: Yeah, that’s true, I think. But why are old paintings in art 
galleries still relevant to the modern world?
F: Well, you could argue that, like historical novels or movies, 
they can transport us back to a previous era, give us an 
understanding of what life was like then, what mattered to 
people. This can inform our understanding of the present.
C: Yeah, but we can get those things from history books. The 
problem as I see it is that some branches of the arts only 
appeal to a tiny minority of people. It’s hard to justify spending 
public money on them all. Take opera, for example. No one in 
my circle of friends has ever set foot in an opera house, so why 
should taxpayers fund it, so that a small number of people can 
have a night out? I mean, if you think about it, shouldn’t the 
government give subsidies to music festivals, which I do go to 
with my friends? What’s the di ff erence?
F: Well, there’s an argument that as a society, we should support 
and encourage all forms of music. Those that can be profitable, 
like big music festivals, should pay for themselves through 
ticket sales and so on. Others that are perhaps more specialist, 
but still have artistic worth, should receive public money so they 
don’t disappear.
C: So, would you argue the same for theatre? That popular 
musicals, like the ones I love, can be funded by ticket sales, 
but the government should pay theatres to put on obscure 
plays from hundreds of years ago that no one wants to see? 
It doesn’t make sense to me! And then, what about things like 
poetry? I mean, I studied poetry at school and I couldn’t make 
head nor tail of it. I just kept thinking, why doesn’t this writer 
use words I can actually understand!
F: Hmm … I think we’re coming at this issue from completely 
opposite points of view. I don’t think we’ll ever see eye to eye, 
but it’s been really useful to work through the arguments with 
you. Thanks.
C: Any time!
Audio 3.04
1 I don’t agree that the government should fund the arts.
2 Why do you think it’s necessary to have art galleries?
3 This can inform our understanding of the present.
4 I don’t think we’ll ever see eye to eye.
Audio 2.07 and 2.08
A: Are you going to accept the job o ff er?
B: I think so.
A: Great. Is the salary good?
B: Well, I can’t say it’s way more than I’m getting now. It’s almost 
the same. But there are other things about it that are as 
important to me as a high salary.
A: Like what?
B: Well, the workplace is close to home. That’s invaluable for me 
because I don’t have a car.
A: But will it be interesting and challenging?
B: No, unfortunately it’ll be nowhere near as interesting as the 
job I’m doing now. But the hours are shorter. To be honest, 
free time is much more important to me than any job!
A: And what about the people who work there?
B: Oh, they seem great. And getting on with colleagues is every 
bit as important as the actual work I do.
A: I agree with you there. 
Audio 2.09
Oscar: 
So, two years ago I’d been going through a hard time and I needed 
a new sense of purpose in life. I’d always enjoyed running, so when 
a friend suggested we do an ultra-marathon together, I jumped 
at the chance. It was a one-hundred-kilometre race and I knew 
it would be tough. So, we started training. We’d given ourselves 
six months to prepare and, I have to admit, I had some pretty low 
points during the training when I really thought I wouldn’t be able 
to see it through. But somehow I kept going and once it got to the 
actual race, there was no way I was going to give up! And when I 
crossed that fi nish line, I had the most wonderful sense of having 
done something that most people wouldn’t ever be able to do and 
I knew that if I could do that, I could cope with anything in life.
Grace: 
I lost my job fi ve years ago and I was absolutely devastated. I’d 
worked in the same o ffi ce for twenty years. I got on with everyone 
and I just didn’t expect that I would ever leave. So, suddenly I had 
to rethink my whole career. Then one day a friend said to me, ‘I 
think you’d be a great teacher.’ And when I thought about it, the 
idea really appealed to me. But it meant going to university and 
doing a three-year degree course, which isn’t easy as a mature 
student. I must admit I found the studying di ffi cult, especially 
writing essays, but actually, what was hardest to cope with was 
having to study in the evenings and at weekends, which meant I 
couldn’t see friends. So, it was tough, but at the same time I felt 
liberated. I was no longer tied down to the same old routine and 
I felt my life could head o ff in a new direction, if I wanted it to. It 
was great. I’m now a teacher and I love it!  
Milo: 
Last year the company I work for organised a team-building 
weekend at this place by the coast. And when we got there, we 
were given the challenge of building a boat in two days. So, there 
we were, six of us, not really sure about where to start. We weren’t 
allowed internet access, so we just had to use our own resources. 
And the fi rst thing we all realised was that the only way to 
succeed was to work together. There was no way any of us could 
do it alone. And it was amazing. The simple realisation that we 
were all in this together completely changed the way we got on. 
No more rivalries, no more complaining about each other, we’d 
become a team. And two days later, we somehow managed to 
put together a boat that actually fl oated. In the end, it wasn’t the 
boat itself that was important, it was the e ff ect the process had 
had on us. From that point on, I’ve always tried to see people’s 
positive sides, rather than focusing on things I don’t like. When it 
really matters, everyone’s got positive qualities.
UNIT 3
Audio 3.01 
1 She sounded as if she was tired.
2 It seemed as though everything was against us that day.
3 She smiled at me, as if to show she understood.
4 It felt as though we’d known each other for years.
5 You look as though you’re waiting for someone.
70

--- PAGE 69 ---

AUDIOSCRIPTS
P: I get that. But young people will naturally fi nd role models 
for themselves, won’t they? I’m thinking of football stars, 
musicians, TV presenters ... Can’t people like that become 
good role models?
N: No, because they’ve gone way beyond ‘doing well’. The gap is 
too great between them and the kids in school, even if they 
started out with similar backgrounds. Yes, kids can look up to 
them and dream, but they can’t usually see a direct path they 
could follow to get to the same end point. So, it doesn’t inspire 
them to work hard and plan their own goals.
P: So, your organisation arranges for volunteers to go into 
schools to provide role models for kids.
N: That’s right. Our volunteers are successful people within 
the students’ own communities. And by successful, I don’t 
necessarily mean wealthy. I mean having a steady, reasonably 
paid job that they enjoy, confidence and a happy personal life. 
P: So, what kinds of people are you actually talking about?
N: We get a full range of professional people … doctors 
and lawyers, fi refighters, people who’ve set up their own 
businesses, people working locally as artists and musicians. 
The most important thing is that they can come and 
communicate their passion, the choices they’ve made and 
the path they followed to get where they are today. I call it 
‘realistic inspiration’, because it’s giving teenagers an idea or 
dream to pursue, but also giving them the message that the 
dream is achievable. 
P: And is it important for the role models to be people the 
teenagers can identify with? I’m thinking of ethnic background, 
gender and so on.
N: Absolutely. For example, there’s not always much point showing 
girls a load of really successful men – they need to see women 
who are somehow similar to them, so they can actually imagine 
themselves in that role. Also, some studies have shown that if 
the role models who go into schools are super-intelligent, one-
time A-grade students and seem to have it all, that’s actually 
demotivating for students, because they think, ‘I’ll never be 
good enough to be like them.’ They need to be ordinary people. 
And interestingly, having role models from different ethnic 
backgrounds is motivating for all students because this gets 
across the idea that the careers they have are open to everyone, 
and that can include young people.
P: And does it work?
N: De finitely. Studies have shown that getting the right kinds of 
role models into schools is certainly motivating for students, 
and can lead to better school attendance, improved exam 
results, that kind of thing.
P: Well, you’re obviously doing a great job, so keep it up!
UNIT 4
Audio 4.01 
1 Don’t worry. It should be fi ne. 
2 You should ask for help if you need it. 
3 I think he should give Ellie a hand. 
4 You should have told him about the party! 
5 You should have a look at some of Oskar’s photos!
Audio 4.02
1 I don’t know who they’ve been selling their products to.
2 I’ll have been living here for fift een years.
3 We’ve been working hard to promote the new toys.
4 Hopefully, we’ll have been paid by the end of the week.
5 They’ll have been travelling for over ten hours!
Audio 4.03
P = Presenter E = E va
P: Welcome to the Business Hour. Now, who isn’t familiar 
with the term ‘superfood’? We seem to see it in newspaper 
headlines virtually every week and it’s widely accepted that 
certain foods like broccoli, blueberries or salmon are naturally 
very good for us – better for us than other similar foods. 
But is this really true, or just the result of clever marketing 
strategies? Today, we’re talking to Eva Pinto, who has written a 
new book on the subject of superfoods. Hello, Eva.
E: Hi.
P: So, tell us fi rst how the term ‘superfood’ came about. Was it 
the result of scienti fic studies or research?
Audio 3.05
1 A:  One of the main issues I have is students not doing the 
homework I set them.
 B: I agree. It’s really annoying. Maybe we should somehow 
punish them if they don’t hand it in on time.
 A: I can see where you’re coming from, but on a practical level 
it would be di ffi cult to put any kind of punishment in place. 
For one thing, it would be very unfair on students who have 
a good and genuine reason for not being able to complete 
their work on time. 
 B: Yes, that makes sense. 
 A: A reward, on the other hand, might be easier to put in place.
 B: A reward? Yes, it might be more e ff ective to give students 
some kind of small extra bonus for completing work on time. 
 A: For example, a reward card like you can get in co ff ee shops. 
They get a stamp every time they hand work in on time, 
then they can get a free cup of co ff ee in the canteen when 
they’ve got ten stamps.
 B: That’s quite a neat idea. I like that.
2 C: It’s such a shame that there are so many lovely salads on 
off er, but so many students still choose the burger and 
chips!
 D: I know. I’d be tempted to ban the fatty foods and just o ff er 
the healthy options.
 C: I can see why you’re suggesting that, but one disadvantage 
of that would be that some students might stop using the 
canteen entirely and fi nd some fast-food outlets to go 
to, instead. Then the income for the canteen would drop. 
Alternatively, what about reducing the cost of the healthy 
options and we could slightly increase the cost of the 
unhealthy foods?
 D: Yeah, I can see the sense in that.
Audio 3.06
1 I can see where you’re coming from, but it might cause us some 
problems.
2 That’s quite a neat idea, but I’m not sure it would be e ff ective.
3 I can see the sense in that, but on a practical level, I’m not sure 
we could make it work.
4 That makes sense, but it might be more e ff ective to try 
something di ff erent.
5 I can see why you’re suggesting that, but one disadvantage 
would be the cost. 
Audio 3.07 and 3.08
A: Whenever we meet up for an evening out, Rob’s always late! 
I’m thinking of telling him not to bother turning up if he can’t 
make it on time.
B: I can see the sense in that, but on the other hand, there’s o ft en 
a good reason why he isn’t on time. It’s sometimes because his 
bus is late.
A: That does sometimes happen. Maybe we could ask him to 
come by bike, like I do.
B: I can see why you’re suggesting that, but on a practical level, 
I don’t think it’s a great idea. He doesn’t live in the city centre 
like you do. I doubt he’d like to go back home on a bike late at 
night.
A: That’s true. Maybe we should just accept that he’s always 
going to be late.
B: Alternatively, why not simply tell him we’re meeting half an 
hour earlier than we really are? That way, he’d probably be on 
time.
A: That’s a really neat idea. Let’s do that!
Audio 3.09
P = Presenter N = N ick
P: Hi. Today I’m very lucky to have Nick Gates with me. He fi nds 
inspirational speakers who can give talks in schools. He’s 
absolutely passionate about the importance of realistic role 
models for teenagers. Nick, why are they so important for 
young people? 
N: Basically, role models can show teenagers a vision of their 
future. Many of the schools we fi nd speakers for are o ft en 
in inner-city areas. The teenagers there don’t tend to come 
into contact with people who’ve done well, so they can’t set 
themselves goals they want to achieve. What they see are 
people doing low-paid jobs, so that’s the only option they see 
for themselves when they’re older.
71

--- PAGE 70 ---

AUDIOSCRIPTS
Audio 4.05
1 I’m experienced with training new sta ff m embers, so I’m 
confident about helping colleagues develop the skills they 
need for the job.
2 One of my main skills is managing budgets, so that won’t be an 
issue for me.
3 I’m proficient in French and German, which will help me a lot in 
the role. 
4 I’m very competent in managing people. I think that’s one of my 
greatest strengths . 
5 I have a lot of experience in working internationally and I enjoy 
the challenges it presents.
Audio 4.06 and 4.07
A: So, you’re applying to work as an assistant manager at one 
of our garden centres. Have you got much management 
experience?
B: Well, can I just say that I have quite a lot from my previous job. 
A: OK. Our work here is quite seasonal – very busy in the spring 
and summer and o ft en quiet at other times. This will be a big 
change for you, won’t it?
B: I’ve thought about this a lot. It will be di ff erent, but the most 
important point here is that I’m good at adapting to new 
situations.
A: And obviously, we sell everything connected to gardening, but 
you don’t have any specialist knowledge of plants. Don’t you 
think this will be a problem for you?
B: That’s an interesting question. What I can say is that I’m a 
quick learner and happy to take advice from other people in 
the team.
A: We pride ourselves on working as a team. How important do 
you think teamwork is?
B: That’s quite a broad topic. Perhaps I could just talk about an 
example of how I worked well as a team in my last job ... 
Audio 4.08
Online stylists have become much more p opular over the last 
few years and they provide a way for ordinary people to get 
access to professional fashion advice from experts. The services 
they off er may include suggesting general tips on styles to wear 
that will suit an individual’s colouring and body shape, and also 
recommending clothes that individuals might like to try. Although 
the service can be expensive initially, a lot of people fi nd that it 
helps them gain con fidence by enabling them to make a wider 
variety of fashion choices.  
Audio 4.09
P = Presenter O = O livia A = Amy E = Ed
P: Welcome to Is it worth it? the show where we talk about goods 
and services and ask if we really ought to be parting with our 
money for them. And today we’re looking at online stylists. 
Olivia is fi rst on the line. Hi. Tell us about your experience.
O: Well, I had a personal consultation with a professional stylist 
over the internet. We talked things through for about an hour 
and I felt she really got to know me and my needs. I’ve always 
been a bit of an impulse buyer. I love clothes and make-up 
and if I see something I like, I buy it, but I’ve never really been 
able to get things to match. My wardrobe was full of lovely 
clothes, but I never seemed to have a complete out fit. So 
what the stylist did was to help bring everything together to 
create a look that was more ‘me’ – with out fits, shoes, make-
up, perfume, everything. I was really pleased with the results 
and although the initial cost seemed quite high, I think in the 
long run it’s saved me money because it’s helped me make 
better use of the things I already had and it’s stopped me from 
impulse buying!
P: That’s good to hear. Thanks, Olivia. And now we’ve got Amy. 
Tell us your story.
A: So, I tried using a stylist because I got a new job and I simply 
didn’t have time to think about shopping. I’m quite particular 
about what I wear and how I look. I like to look well-dressed 
and my make-up has to be right. Maybe I was expecting a 
bit too much from the service, but I would say that in the 
six months I was signed up, there wasn’t a single item that 
really wowed me. It was all very predictable. The other 
thing that annoyed me was it was very clear to me that the 
recommendations were actually coming from a computer 
program because there was no individuality in the styles I 
E: No, not at all. In fact, the fi rst food to earn the label of 
‘superfood’ was the banana, early in the twentieth century. A 
fruit company was trying to promote this fruit as a practical 
snack that you could carry around, saying that because you 
don’t eat the skin, the part that you eat stays clean and 
healthy for longer than other fruits, like apples or pears. 
P: Really? So, the term was used just as part of a push to sell 
more bananas? 
E: That’s right. 
P: Wow. And how did the idea spread to other foods?
E: Basically, it’s been a similar process, linked to marketing. If 
the food industry wants to promote a particular food, it funds 
a piece of research and only needs the slimmest evidence 
that the food contains an unusual vitamin, or a high level of a 
particular mineral, to claim it’s a superfood. 
P: And presumably it’s a successful strategy?
E: Absolutely! I mean, would we all eat as much broccoli if it 
wasn’t for its superfood status? 
P: Good question. But, is there a problem with certain foods 
being promoted as superfoods? I mean, they tend to be 
generally foods that are fresh and natural, which are probably 
good for us.
E: Well, I think there is a problem. If we think about the concept 
of a healthy diet, it’s all about variety – eating a wide range 
of diff erent foods. All foods have their own combinations of 
nutrients, so the more varied your diet, the wider the range of 
nutrients you’re going to get. If people believe that they only 
need to eat a small range of so-called superfoods, they may 
not bother to think about having a varied, balanced diet. 
P: I see. 
E: And, even more worryingly, it gives food producers a label 
they can use to disguise the overall poor quality of a particular 
food. For example, I could produce a sweet snack that has high 
levels of fat or sugar, but if I add some blueberries, or a few 
nuts, I can claim it has ‘superfood’ qualities. And who wouldn’t 
be tempted by a tasty, sugary snack that’s supposedly really 
good for you?  
P: So, how do you suggest people approach things which are 
promoted as ‘superfoods’?
E: I would say focus on eating as many healthy fruits and 
vegetables as you can, regardless of whether or not they have 
a superfood label. And generally, have as varied a diet as you 
can. 
P: Nice simple advice, Eva. Thanks for coming in today – and this 
reminds us yet again that we should always be aware of the 
diff erent ways in which companies try to get us to buy things.
Audio 4.04
1 A: So, as you can imagine, this is a very big, busy hotel, and 
at times you might be under a lot of pressure, with guests 
waiting to check in and out. Do you have experience of 
working under a lot of pressure, and do you think you’d be 
able to handle it?
 B:  Well, I’ve thought about this quite a lot. It’s true that my 
previous job was fairly quiet, but what I can say is that I 
believe in giving great customer service. It’s important to 
make each guest feel that your attention is focused purely 
on them and their needs, so the key is working quickly and 
effi ciently.
2 A: Now, a lot of the customers we get here are very 
demanding, and they will complain if the food isn’t exactly 
as they want it to be. What do you think is the best strategy 
for dealing with complaints?
 B: Well, that’s quite a broad topic. Can I just say that I am well 
aware that this is a top-end establishment, so it’s natural 
that customers should expect the best. Perhaps I could 
just talk about my experience of dealing with complaints 
in other places I’ve worked in, because I think although the 
situations are di ff erent, the principles are the same.
3 A: So, you’ll have targets for the number of customers you 
have to call each day and of course there are targets for 
your overall volume of sales. One slight concern I have is 
that our products are quite technical and customers may 
ask detailed questions. Do you think that will be a problem 
for you?
 B: That’s an interesting question. Of course, I don’t have a 
technical background, but … the main point here is that I’m 
willing to learn. I’ve already read up on all your products 
and my understanding of the technical details will improve 
quite quickly once I’m up and running in the job. 
72

--- PAGE 71 ---

AUDIOSCRIPTS
to protect them. So overnight it became illegal to kill or 
harm these animals. And now they’ve been successfully 
reintroduced into large areas of the US such as Yellowstone 
National Park, where they’re still protected by law.
P: But not all animals are hunted and killed directly by humans, 
are they?
D: That’s right. Take the case of a bird of prey, the peregrine 
falcon. At one time, these lived all over the world. They’re 
amazing creatures. When they drop down to catch their prey, 
usually small birds, they can travel at over 320 kilometres an 
hour!
P: Wow!
D: But in the 1960s, they su ff ered because toxic pesticides got 
into the food chain – farmers put the pesticides on their 
crops, these got into insects, then into small birds that ate 
the insects and fi nally into the peregrines. So in 1972 the US 
government banned these extremely harmful pesticides and 
now the population of these magni ficent birds is growing 
again. 
P: So, again, it took a change in the law to bring them back. But 
surely there are also things individuals can do to help?
D: Absolutely. Buy sustainable, environmentally-friendly 
products by all means, and make your garden wildlife-friendly. 
But the most powerful thing that people can do – in my view – 
is to put pressure on your government to do more.
Audio 5.04
The giant panda is a type of large mammal native to China. They 
are one of the best-known symbols of conservation in the world, 
but their worldwide celebrity only took o ff in the early twentieth 
century, when an American fashion designer, Ruth Harkness, 
captured a baby panda and fl ew it to the US, where the American 
public immediately fell in love with it. In the 1960s, four panda 
reserves were created in China and a law was introduced which 
prohibited killing the animals. They are now no longer considered 
endangered. 
Audio 5.05
1 A: We know that more and more families are struggling to 
cope and of course the kids su ff er the most. I know a lot of 
children get free school meals, but that doesn’t help them 
during the school holidays. And it isn’t clear who’s in a 
position to help out – I mean, schools are closed and there 
are no government schemes. Basically, there’s a total lack 
of support.
 B: In other words, no one’s taking responsibility for the 
problem.
2 A: So, the swimming pool’s closed down, there aren’t any 
youth clubs and teenagers get moved on if they hang out 
in the shopping centre. There’s nothing for young people to 
do, in a nutshell.
 B: So what you’re saying is we need more things for young 
people.
3 A: There’s been a big increase in the number of burglaries, and 
theft s of cars are also up. In brief, more people than ever 
are reporting incidents to the police, but they don’t have 
enough people to deal with everything that’s happening.
 B: To put it another way, the police need more resources.
4 A: Well, thank you all very much for your contributions. So, to 
recap, we’ve talked about emissions from cars and buses 
and the possibility of banning cars from the city centre and 
encouraging the local authority to invest in electric buses. 
5 A: It just feels that this problem is too big for small campaign 
groups like us to deal with. Whatever changes individuals 
make in their daily lives, like riding their bike to work instead 
of driving, they can’t do much to reduce greenhouse gases 
overall. 
 B: So what you mean is that governments need to take action. 
Audio 5.06
1 To summarise, if we want to bring about change, we need to 
raise awareness of this problem.
2 What you’re saying is the problem of pollution is getting worse 
and now is the time to take action.
3 To recap, we discussed a concert to raise money and also 
setting up an online donation scheme.
was being sent. I just felt I was part of some system, not a real 
person with real needs. 
P: I’m sorry to hear that, Amy. Next up is Ed. What was your 
experience like?
E: Well, I’ve always hated shopping so I decided to try an online 
stylist just for convenience. I had to fi ll out loads of forms 
online, look at loads of pictures of di ff erent clothes and select 
the ones I liked and also say which brands suited me and what 
sizes were good for me, that kind of thing. Then I was sent 
recommendations once a month. I would say it was de finitely 
time-e ffi cient for me, because most of the recommendations 
were fi ne and it saved me having to spend hours browsing 
online or trailing around the shops. But in the end, I felt it 
was just costing me too much, because everything they 
recommended was about twice the price I normally would 
have paid. So that was a bit of a disappointment. 
UNIT 5
Audio 5.01 
1 I think I’d be happier if I’d studied medicine.
2 I’d have enjoyed the fi lm more if it wasn’t so long!
3 You’d have passed your exam if you spent more time studying.
4 If we’d moved to South America, I’d be fl uent in Spanish.
5 If the weather was better, I’d have organised a barbecue.
Audio 5.02
1 The animals are not able to reproduce. They have reproductive 
problems.
2 Their behaviour is a result of their instincts. It is instinctive 
behaviour.
3 These birds migrate each year. They are migratory birds.
4 She believes in protecting the environment. She’s an 
environmental campaigner.
5 I believe in conservation. I’m a conservationist.
Audio 5.03
P = Presenter D = D aniel
P: Welcome to Nature First . This week we’re talking about the 
best way to save endangered animals, which is something 
many of us feel very strongly about. With me is Daniel Shipley, 
a lecturer in conservation at the University of She ffi eld. 
Welcome to the show. 
D: Hello.
P: Now, I read the other day that tens of thousands of animal 
species are currently facing extinction. Is that right?
D: Unfortunately, yes, and the problem is growing worse, caused 
by loss of habitat, pollution, all the usual reasons we’re all 
familiar with.
P: And all caused by human activity?
D: Pretty much, yes.
P: But you believe it’s still possible to save many of these 
species?  
D: Of course. As I just said, the majority of animals are in 
danger because of human activities and I believe that human 
intervention is the best way to reverse the situation. 
P: Can you give us some examples?
D: Yes. One good example is a kind of wild horse called 
Przewalski’s Horse. This horse lives in parts of Central 
Asia and is the only kind of wild horse that still exists. It 
became endangered because local people bred it with their 
domesticated horses. It was declared extinct in the wild, but 
a programme was set up by zoos around the world to breed 
the animals there. This has been hugely successful and the 
first horses have already been reintroduced into their natural 
habitats. 
P: That’s a good news story. So, zoos have a role to play in 
conservation?
D: De finitely, but a relatively minor one because a lot of wild 
animals can’t be bred successfully in zoos. The biggest 
changes come about when governments intervene directly 
to protect animals. For example, by the 1960s, wolves had 
pretty much disappeared from many parts of the United 
States, caused mainly by people shooting them in the belief 
that they posed a direct threat to humans and livestock, even 
though they are in fact vital to ecosystems. The government 
intervened and in the 1970s, implemented legislation 
73

--- PAGE 72 ---

AUDIOSCRIPTS
P: I know the feeling.
N: S o, I set three alarms – one by my bed, one on my desk and the 
third by my bedroom door, so I thought I’d be bound to hear at 
least one of the three.
P: And what happened?
N: I slept through all three! When I fi nally woke up, I couldn’t 
believe it!
P: Oh, no! So, I’m presuming you didn’t get the job, Nick?
N: No, but in fact it was fi ne. Looking back, I wouldn’t have 
enjoyed the job. So it was lucky that fate intervened and it was 
definitely for the best.
P: Well, I’m pleased about that. Let’s hear from Megan now. 
What’s your story?
M: Oh, I still feel so bad when I think about this. A couple of 
years ago, on my birthday, some friends invited me round to 
their place for the evening. They didn’t say much about it and 
I thought it would just be a quiet evening, you know. Well, 
anyway, I was a bit tired in the aft ernoon, so I decided to take a 
quick nap. I didn’t wake up until midnight and by that time there 
were about fift y messages on my phone from friends wondering 
where I was. My friends had actually organised a big party for 
me – music, food, the lot! I just stared at all their messages and 
wanted to cry! I knew they’d never do it for me again!
P: Oh, no. That’s bad luck, Megan. But let’s go to Joey now. What 
did you miss, Joey?
J: My brother’s graduation, when he fi nished university. I didn’t 
miss it completely, but … I’d  forgotten to set my alarm, so I 
missed my bus. I was over an hour late. I turned up halfway 
through. I just remember walking in and everyone was looking 
at me. I felt such an idiot! 
P: Well, it could happen to anyone. Thanks for sharing. Now, I 
think we’ve got Alicia here and I think you missed out on an 
important trip?
A: Yes, it’s Alicia here, hi. Well, I had to get up very early to go to 
the airport a couple of years ago. But … I fell asleep on the 
train on the way there. I woke up miles away, too late to catch 
my plane! The worst thing was, I’d asked the guy opposite to 
wake me up when we got to my stop, but can you believe he 
didn’t bother and just got o ff the train at his stop? Oh, if I’d got 
hold of him!
P: It’s probably just as well you didn’t! Well, we’re out of time, 
so … 
Audio 6.04
1 When I fi nally woke up, I couldn’t believe it!
2 Looking back, I wouldn’t have enjoyed the job.
3 I’d forgotten to set my alarm, so I missed my bus 
4 I fell asleep on the train on the way there.
Audio 6.05
1 I’ve had an email from my boss. 
2 Is that for me? 
3 Where are we going tonight? 
4 What do you think that was? 
Audio 6.06
S = Student H = H ead
1 S:  We’re not happy with the new charges for the car park. 
Some students live outside the city and have to drive to 
college, so it isn’t reasonable to expect them to pay for car 
parking every day. It’s going to cost them a fortune!
 H:  Yes, I can see that. We do need to get some income to help 
maintain the car park, but what I can do is set up a system 
of parking permits for students who have to drive, with a 
small annual charge. How does that sound?
 S:  Yes, that sounds like a good compromise.
2 H:  What’s the issue with the canteen?
 S:  It closes far too early. It closes at four o’clock, but lessons 
go on until six. It means students who have lessons later in 
the day can’t get a cup of co ff ee or something to eat. This 
isn’t really acceptable.
 H:  The problem is, it costs money to keep it open. Maybe we 
could come to an arrangement about having some self-
service machines available when the canteen is closed.
 S: Yes, we’d be happy with that.
Audio 5.07 and 5.08
1 A: The library is struggling to stay open because it doesn’t 
have enough funding to pay its sta ff to work full-time. 
 B: In other words, if we want to keep the library open, we’ll 
need a fundraising campaign.
2 A: Three years ago, there were around 250 homeless people in 
the city. Last year, this fi gure had gone up to 400, and this 
year’s count is 550.
 B: What you’re saying is that the problem is getting worse 
each year.
3 A: Millions of pounds are given each year to the area, but 
poverty isn’t going away.
 B: So, basically the current system isn’t working.
4 A: It’s easy for people to sign online petitions, but few would 
actually take action to bring about change.
 B: So, you think they’re a waste of time, in a nutshell.
Audio 5.09
Did you know, up to forty percent of the things we do every day 
are things we do purely out of habit, without thinking about them? 
Habits are powerful things, which is why creating new, better ones 
is a fantastic way to improve your life and increase your happiness. 
But, of course, we all know how hard it is to change our habits. 
It’s so easy to say to ourselves, ‘I’m going to get up early and do 
some exercise every morning’, only to find we simply don’t have the 
motivation or determination to see it through. That’s why I’m going 
to talk you through some tried and tested methods for creating 
new habits, so you can succeed in making the changes you want. 
First, don’t try to change everything at once. We can all write a 
list as long as our arm of things we’d like to do better, but this 
isn’t helpful. Choose just one thing to work on at a time. And start 
small. Minor changes that take less time are much less likely to 
go wrong and result in you giving up than major ones. Decide on 
a small adjustment to make fi rst – something that won’t take too 
much eff ort. So, rather than starting with running fi ve kilometres 
every morning, start with a 10-minute walk. This way, you can 
get it done without using up your stores of motivation. Secondly, 
make a commitment. It’s o ft en said that it takes twenty-one 
days to build a new habit, but in reality this varies from person to 
person and also depends on the kind of change you’re trying to 
bring about. So make a time commitment you can stick to, with a 
minimum of thirty days. This is short enough to make it a target 
you can reach, but it’s long enough to start to get that new habit 
fixed in place. Next, relate your new habit to things you already 
do. So, if your new change is to go to the gym, decide you’ll do it 
on your way home from work, so it’s just a minor diversion from 
your existing routines. Now, building new habits is all about 
control and consistency, but it’s clear that life will sometimes get 
in the way, and you’ll have to break your habit from time to time. 
Don’t let yourself get into the mindset that it’s all or nothing. 
Accept that failure is part of the process of change, but don’t 
let that failure become the new habit. If you miss one day, make 
sure you get back on track the next. You’ll never be perfect, but 
aim for consistency. And fi nally, keep an eye on how you’re doing. 
When you’ve got through your fi rst thirty days, reward yourself 
– you’ve achieved something! We all need rewards, and they will 
strengthen your motivation to continue and hit your next target. 
UNIT 6
Audio 6.01
1 In no way do I think we should rely on computers to this extent.
2 Never before have computers been able to predict the weather 
so accurately.
3 Under no circumstances would I ever lie to my friends.
4 Only in ten years’ time will the consequences become clear.
Audio 6.02 and 6.03
P = Presenter N = N ick M = Megan J = Joey A = Alicia
P: Today, we want your stories about sleeping too late. We’ve all 
done it – me included, but the question is, what’s the worst 
thing you’ve missed because you didn’t wake up? First on the 
line is Nick from York. Tell us what happened to you.
N: Well, this was about two years ago. I’d applied for a job in the 
personnel department of a large company and I’d been given 
an interview at nine o’clock in the morning. I’ve never been a 
morning person, so I knew I’d struggle to get up. 
74

--- PAGE 73 ---

AUDIOSCRIPTS
nervous about new innovations, aren’t they? I mean, when the 
first trains were developed, people were terrified that the human 
body wouldn’t be able to cope with travelling so fast! Now, 
travelling at high speed is just a normal part of life, so maybe 
in five years’ time, we won’t think twice about getting into a car 
and letting it drive us.
B: Hmm, maybe. In general, I do try to embrace new technology, 
but I just feel in this case there’s too much at stake if the 
technology fails. I guess lots of people will de finitely be 
using driverless cars in a few years’ time, but hopefully not 
everywhere – not when the conditions call for a lot of quick 
decisions to be made. 
D: Yeah, I think you’re right.
UNIT 7
Audio 7.01 
1 Aft er a while, we started to feel extremely cold and hungry.
2 She was reasonably happy in her job for the first few years.
3 Interestingly, we found out later  that the two of them were 
related.
4 We meet up and go for a co ff ee together from time to time.
5 Two years later, I realised what a terrible mistake  I had made.
6 She found herself out of work, temporarily.
Audio 7.02
Today I want to talk about word origins. It’s been estimated 
that English has around a million words and they made their 
way into the language in many di ff erent ways. For some words, 
the meaning has stayed more or less the same since they were 
first used, yet for others the meanings have changed beyond 
recognition. 
One of the most interesting groups of words, in my opinion, 
refl ects the ways in which people saw the world in earlier times. 
One good example of this is the word disaster. The word is now 
defined as any unfortunate event, from someone losing their job 
to a natural event such as an earthquake. In the modern world, 
events of this kind are seen as random – just bad luck. But in the 
1500s, it was believed that events on Earth were controlled by 
the position of the stars, so anything unpleasant or unlucky that 
happened was the result of the stars being in unlucky positions. 
The Italian for ‘star’ is astro, so a disastro is literally a bad 
arrangement of the stars – in English, a plain disaster. The word 
influenza (or flu for short) has a similar origin, coming from the 
Italian word for ‘in fl uence’, as again, it was thought that the stars 
infl uenced our health.
 Another route for new words into English was from contact with 
other cultures and ways of life. When English sailors fi rst arrived 
in India, they had never seen dense, tropical forests before and 
had no word for them, so they took the Hindi word jangal and 
adapted it to an English pronunciation, where it became jungle. 
Similarly, the ketchup that we all put on our burgers and chips 
originated as a Chinese word for a spicy sauce that English 
explorers fi rst encountered during their voyages of discovery 
around 500 years ago.
 Words such as quiz and robot lead us to another group of 
fascinating word origins. According to the popular story, the word 
quiz originated as a joke, when the manager of a Dublin theatre 
boasted that he could make a new word and get everyone talking 
about it within 24 hours. He supposedly employed people to write 
the word on walls all over the city and his e ff orts did in fact lead 
to people talking about the new word, which took on the meaning 
of a puzzle and is now an established word in the language. The 
creation of the word robot was similarly down to one person, 
a writer from the Czech Republic who, long before modern 
computer technology, used the word in one of his plays to talk 
about an arti ficial human that was created to serve others. Later, 
when scientists really did develop machines to serve us in this 
way, they took the word and decided to make use of it.
 Finally, although a lot is known about where our words come 
from, there are some surprising gaps. The origin of the everyday 
word OK, used to convey agreement, remains a mystery. Although 
its fi rst use can be traced back to an American newspaper article 
in 1839, the writer of the article probably didn’t invent it and 
its origin is uncertain. Many theories have been put forward, 
including that it’s an abbreviation for ‘all correct’, but this has not 
been established as fact. 
3 H:  I gather you have a complaint about your student 
accommodation?
 S:  Yes. I signed up for a small student room on the main 
college campus and I was told I could have one, but now 
they’re telling me the only ones available are larger rooms, 
which are more expensive. I don’t think it’s fair I have to pay 
more, just because of a mistake by the college.
 H:  Hmm, yes, I see your point. I can o ff er you a reduction in 
your rent, so it’s the same as for one of the smaller rooms.
 S: Great. Yes, that’s acceptable to me.
Audio 6.07
1 It isn’t reasonable to expect me to work overtime with no extra 
pay. 
2 I don’t think it’s fair I should be paid less than some of my 
colleagues who do the same job as I do. 
3 I always have to stay longer at the end of the day and clear up 
everyone’s mess. It really isn’t acceptable. 
Audio 6.08 and 6.09
A: I hear you wanted to talk to me. What can I do for you?
B: W ell, I love working here, but I always seem to get the 
weekend shi ft s, whereas other members of sta ff rarely work 
at weekends. I don’t think it’s fair that I should always have to 
work at the weekend.
A: I see what you mean. The problem is, other members of sta ff 
have been here longer than you and they’re mainly older, so 
they have family commitments. 
B: I understand that, but it isn’t reasonable to expect me to give 
up my social life, just because I’m younger. Also, I don’t get 
paid any extra for working at the weekend.
A: OK. Well, maybe we could come to an arrangement. What 
about working every other weekend?
B: Yes, that sounds like a good compromise.
A: And I can o ff er you an extra £20 for every weekend shi ft you 
work. 
B OK. Yes, I’m happy with that. Thanks.
Audio 6.10
D: How did your presentation go, Barbara?
B: O h, Dan, it was awful! I was really well prepared, but as usual, 
the technology let me down. I couldn’t connect my laptop to 
the screen, so I couldn’t show all my graphs and charts.
D: That’s so annoying! I mean, technology’s great when it works, 
but when it fails, it’s a real pain!
B: I know. That’s why I’m against driverless cars. I know some 
people are really enthusiastic about the idea, but I just think – 
the program’s bound to go wrong, and what happens then?
D: I know what you mean, although you have to admit it would be 
pretty amazing to get into your car, input your destination and 
just sit back and watch a movie while the car takes you there. It 
would take all the stress out of driving, wouldn’t it?
B: Well, yes and no. I don’t think I’d ever be able to take my eyes off  
the road! I’d be constantly terrified the car would do something 
stupid, like go the wrong way down a one-way street. 
D: That’s true. I guess there are lots of situations that technology 
can’t really deal with like, if a road is suddenly closed and 
there’s a diversion. 
B: Exactly, Dan. And I read about a case where a police o ffi cer 
stopped a driverless car in a city in California for going too 
slowly. It was probably just following its programming, but 
it was holding all the tra ffi c up and that’s dangerous in itself 
because when other drivers become impatient, they’re more 
likely to make bad decisions.
D: Yeah. And that’s another interesting point, actually. Who do the 
police arrest if a driverless car’s driving badly? Who’s to blame?
B: More importantly, who’s responsible if there’s an accident? 
You can’t lock the car up for dangerous driving!
D: That’s true. So, do you think driverless cars are just a bad idea 
and should never be allowed?
B: I guess that’s what I feel deep down. Like we were saying, 
technology’s great when it works, but it does let you down 
sometimes. And if the technology in a driverless car fails, it 
could have really serious consequences. Don’t you think?
D: I’m not sure. I mean, isn’t it the case that all new technology has 
issues when it first comes out and gradually, it gets refined and 
improved and the problems get sorted out? People are always 
75

--- PAGE 74 ---

AUDIOSCRIPTS
Audio 7.03
1 It’s been estimated that English has around a million words.
2 The word is now de fined as any unfortunate event.
3 It was thought that the stars in fl uenced our health.
4 They had never seen dense, tropical forests before.
Audio 7.04
1 Because Theo is allergic to cow’s milk, he drinks oat milk 
instead. 
2 As it’s so late, I suggest we just have a light meal . 
3 Since we are interested in food, we’re always looking for new 
restaurants to try. 
4 Because of the bad weather, we had to cancel the barbecue. 
5 As a result of the survey, the cafeteria decided to o ff er more 
vegan options. 
Audio 7.05
1 A: Are you OK, Katie?
 B : Not really. It’s these shoes – I bought them last week. They 
look great, but my feet are killing me! 
 A: Let’s have a look. Oh, your toes are all up in the end!
 B: I know. They’re about ten sizes too small, but I just couldn’t 
resist them. They look so good, but I can’t wait to take them 
off !
2 A: Hi, Louis. Been shopping? What’s in your bag? Oh, what is 
that? That’s not your usual style of jumper!
 B: Too right! I wouldn’t be seen dead in it! It’s horrible! I’m 
taking it to the second-hand shop to get rid of it. I’ve told 
my grandma a million times not to buy me clothes for my 
birthday, but she doesn’t listen!
 A: Ah, what a shame. 
3 A: So, Helga, I’m sure there’ll be something in your wardrobe 
that you can wear for your interview.
 B: There isn’t.
 A: What about this dress?
 B: Oh, no! That’s centuries old! Look, the style is completely 
out of fashion now!
 A: Yes, but you don’t have to be a slave to fashion, you know. 
And you’re going to a job interview, not a trendy party.
 B: I know, but I’d die of shame if any of my friends saw me in it!
4 A: Hi, James. Have you got your phone back yet?
 B: No. They said there isn’t much wrong with it, but it’s taking 
forever! They said it won’t be ready until the end of next week.
 A: Really?
 B: Yeah, and it’s going to cost a fortune! It would have been 
cheaper to get a new phone!
Audio 7.06
1 I wouldn’t be seen dead in that coat.
2 This hat cost a fortune!
3 Oh, these boots are killing me!
4 I’d die of embarrassment if I had to wear that dress!
Audio 7.07 and 7.08
A: I can’t believe you’ve never been in a second-hand shop 
before. There are so many bargains! Look at this, a really nice 
wool jacket for only £6.
B: It’s horrible! I wouldn’t be seen dead in it!
A: You have to think about whether something will look OK, 
rather than just focusing on designer labels.
B: But I love new clothes. There’s nothing like that feeling of 
wearing something new for the fi rst time!
A: OK, so how about these jeans? Look, they’ve got a designer 
label, and they haven’t been worn much.
B: They’re OK, but look at the queue for the changing room. 
It’ll take forever to try them on! Can’t we just go and get 
something to eat? I’m starving !
A: OK, OK.
B: Oh, just a minute. Look at those shoes. They’re a really good 
brand. They would cost a fortune new! Oh, I’ve got to try those 
on!
Audio 7.09
James: 
The thing I find interesting about early memories is that they’re 
so vivid. I can still feel that mixture of excitement and fear as I 
walked into my new classroom for the first time with all those 
kids I’d never seen before. I had my bag with my sports k it and 
everything, all brand new. And yeah, then Miss Evans walked in 
and told us all to find a seat and sit down. I don’t know quite what I 
was expecting. I think my older brothers had terri fied me by telling 
me how strict and fierce teachers could be, but I just remember 
thinking she seemed really kind because she kept telling us it was 
all OK and we were going to have lots of fun. I don’t remember 
many other details about the day, apart from having to do some 
dancing at the end of the aft ernoon, which I hated!
Ellie: 
One of my earliest memories was being in my grandparents’ 
house. It’s a big old house, out in the countryside and I think I 
can remember it so vividly because it was so completely di ff erent 
to being at home. You know, there was countryside all around, 
birds singing and lots of insects – I remember them! Anyway, I 
remember being spoiled all day with treats and my granddad 
getting out his train set for us to play with – the one he had when 
he was a young boy. But the highlight of the day was when it got 
dark and my granddad took me up to his attic room where he had 
a telescope set up. I was absolutely fascinated by that! He let me 
look through it and I just couldn’t believe what I was seeing. I’d 
never really seen the stars like that before and it just really caught 
my imagination. So, yeah, a really powerful memory.
Josh: 
I think probably the first proper memories I have are of a trip to 
the south coast. I think I must’ve been about four or maybe five – it 
was definitely before I started school, but it was the first time I’d 
seen the sea and it made a big impression on me. I don’t remember 
everything, obviously, but I know from talking to my parents that 
we were there for a week and I just have these images in my mind 
of all the exciting things we did – like running away from the waves 
and making castles in the sand. Then there were all these stalls 
along the sea front and I remember having a go at a game and 
getting a teddy bear as a prize. I also remember we bought some 
chips and I wanted to go back to the beach to eat them, but my 
parents wouldn’t let me – I think they thought it’d be too far to walk 
and the chips would get cold. So I remember feeling disappointed 
about that. But, yeah, I just remember a very happy time.  
UNIT 8
Audio 8.01 
1 Even though the fi lm has a sad ending,  it’s still upli ft ing.
2 Social media is certainly useful. However, it also creates a lot of 
problems.
3 Fun though the holiday was, I don’t think we’ll be going back 
there.
4 The fi lm was really good, though some of the acting wasn’t 
brilliant.
Audio 8.02
1 I think I’ll have fi nished work by fi ve o’clock. 
2 Maybe new, cleaner forms of transport will have been 
developed by then.
3 I’m sure she’ll have been promoted by next year.
4 I’m sure Jason will have heard about the job by next week.
Audio 8.03
P = Presenter F = F abio
P: Last week’s show was all about new inventions that could 
have a big impact on the world. So, I thought that this week, 
we’d spend a bit of time seeing the other side of things and 
take a look at some inventions that are perhaps a little less 
crucial. With me is Fabio Corelli, a journalist for the magazine 
Technology Today. Fabio, I think you’ve got some examples of 
inventions that we could perhaps do without …
F: Yes. The fi rst one is the Hoverbrella, which is basically an 
umbrella which you attach to a drone – you know, one of those 
small fl ying machines a lot of people use for taking photos. 
The idea is that you have a remote control and use it to keep 
the umbrella in the air, above your head.
P: So, like a hands-free umbrella?
F: Yes.
P: And, can you imagine it being useful?
F: Well, I mean, in theory you don’t have to hold the umbrella, so 
you have both your hands free, but in practice, you do have to 
hold the remote control, so you don’t really gain anything.
76

--- PAGE 75 ---

AUDIOSCRIPTS
Audio 8.06
1 Well, I guess we’re all di ff erent.
2 I mean, cash just isn’t a real present, is it?
3 I would still say that if you feel you deserve a higher salary, you 
should definitely mention it.
4 Thanks. It’s been great talking to you. It’s really helpful to get 
your views.
Audio 8.07 and 8.08
A: Can you believe it? Adele asked if she could borrow some 
money. I would never ask friends for money.
B: Well, it depends. I mean, I can see what you’re saying, but on 
the other hand, if one of my friends was struggling for money, I 
wouldn’t mind helping out.
A: But, as I see it, it’s unfair because it would be so hard for a 
friend to refuse, even if they couldn’t really a ff ord to lend any.
B: Yes, I guess that’s one way of looking at it, but on the other 
hand, what are friends for? They’re the people who will help if 
you’re in trouble.
A: I dare say that’s true, but it might be really hard to ask for the 
money back. I mean, what if the friend can’t a ff ord to pay you 
back?
B: Yes, I’m with you there. It could be tricky. But frankly, that’s a 
risk I would take.
A: Well, I guess we’re all di ff erent.
Audio 8.09
P = Presenter R = R oseanna
P: Welcome to Science Today. We’re talking about the science 
in science fi ction – how realistic is it and does it sometimes 
become reality? With me is Roseanna Hawks, a scientist and 
science- fiction writer. So, Roseanna, I’m guessing Dr Who’s 
strange-looking travel machine is de finitely not scienti fic?
R: No, that’s pure fi ction. For a start, the fi rst interesting thing 
about the TARDIS, as it’s called, is that it’s bigger on the inside 
than it appears on the outside, which just goes against the 
basic laws of physics. 
P: But are there any examples of technologies created by 
science- fiction writers which have become reality?
R: Oh, yes, loads. You know the TV show Star Trek ? Well, the fi rst 
series was shown in the 1960s and featured a small hand-held 
phone called the ‘communicator’. It’s weird when you see it 
now, because it looks remarkably like a modern mobile phone. 
But, as you know, the fi rst real mobile phone wasn’t invented 
until 1973 and was huge, nothing like the ones we have now! 
P: Ah, I must watch some of those old episodes again!
R: Yeah. And Star Trek also gave us the ‘machine translator’. 
It looked a bit like a hand-held microphone and when the 
characters met aliens from other galaxies, they held up the 
device and it would instantly translate what the aliens were 
saying into English.
P: And now of course we all have translation programs on our 
phones. I mean, they aren’t perfect, and they do make mistakes, 
but I guess they aren’t far off  that science-fiction vision.
R: Absolutely. And also from the 1960s, the fi lm 2001: A Space 
Odyssey gave us the idea of the tablet computer. In the 
film, the characters watch the news on small, fl at-screen 
computers which they call ‘newspads’ – sound familiar? In fact, 
aft er Apple fi rst released its iPad in 2010 and registered the 
tablet as their invention, the idea was challenged in court by 
another company, who argued that the creators of the fi lm 
were in fact the inventors. The judge didn’t agree, though, and 
Apple won the case. 
P: Interesting! Those are all quite small devices. Are there any big 
inventions that have been predicted in science fi ction?
R: Oh, yes. The same fi lm, 2001: A Space Odyssey had ‘Space 
Station Five’. It was a living space in orbit around the Earth, 
where there was no gravity and astronauts could fl y around 
and bounce o ff the walls. 
P: That sounds very familiar.
R: Yeah, and in fact scientists have said the fi lm provided 
inspiration for the development of the International Space 
Station, which was launched in 1998 and has provided a 
location for the study of the e ff ects of gravity, or lack of it, 
on humans. And in the fi lm, 2001, it was also the fi rst stop 
for astronauts on the way to the Moon and other space 
destinations. Perhaps that might also become a reality one 
day.
P: Amazing! Thanks so much for joining us.
P: Yes, and I’d guess it would be quite tricky to keep it directly 
above your head.
F: Absolutely!
P: Well, that gets eight out of ten from me for being a pointless 
invention. What’s the next one?
F: The next one is the Stop Snacking Sweater. This is to tackle 
the problem many of us face, which is grazing on snacks while 
we’re watching TV. It’s so di ffi cult to resist, isn’t it?
P: Oh, yes, I de finitely suff er from that.
F: So this invention is basically a jumper, but the sleeves are 
joined together at the front and your hands stay inside the 
garment, …
P: Ah, and you can’t be tempted to open a packet of crisps or a 
bar of chocolate!
F: Exactly. 
P: I mean, clearly there is a serious problem with people 
consuming junk food, but I’m not sure an invention like this is 
going to solve it. 
F: Quite. But the final one I want to mention is even more 
pointless – it’s the Watch Your Step Rug. This is a rug for people 
who can’t be bothered to take o ff  their dirty shoes when they 
come into the house. It’s basically a rug with holes in for your 
feet. So, the idea is, you step in the holes in the rug, so your 
feet go onto the floor beneath, so the rug will never get dirty. 
P: Oh, no! Please tell me this isn’t serious!
F: Yes, you guessed it. In fact, none of the inventions I’ve talked 
about are intended to be used. They have all been created by 
Matty Benedetto, for his website, ‘Unnecessary inventions’. 
Matty is a genuine inventor, but he designs inventions to solve 
problems that don’t really exist. He produces working models, 
oft en using a 3-D printer. Then, he uploads photos and videos 
of his inventions onto his website. 
P: And what’s his motivation?
F: Partly because he simply loves inventing things, and partly it’s 
to show what a waste of time it is producing and selling things 
we don’t really need.
P: Well, I de finitely agree with that, especially when there are 
a lot of serious problems that people should be putting their 
minds to solving.
Audio 8.04
1 In practice, you do have to hold the remote control.
2 The idea is, you step in the holes in the rug.
3 He designs inventions to solve problems that don’t really exist.
4 He uploads photos and videos of his inventions onto his website
Audio 8.05
1 A: Frankly, I object to paying ten percent extra for a meal! I 
think the price on the menu should be what you pay. It’s 
wrong that they expect you to give more.
 B: But the other side of the coin is that people who work in the 
restaurant o ft en rely on tips because they’re not very well 
paid.
 C: Yes, I’m with Claire here. I think it’s a bit stingy not to leave 
a tip, especially when the waiters have been helpful.
 A:  Well, I guess we’re all di ff erent.  
2 A:  I hate it when people can’t be bothered to think about what 
to buy me for my birthday. I mean, cash just isn’t a real 
present, is it?
 B: Well, I guess that’s one way of looking at it, but on the other 
hand I really hate getting something completely unsuitable, 
like a piece of clothing that I have to pretend to love!
 C: Yes, that makes two of us. As I see it, I’d rather have cash 
and use it to buy something I want. 
3 A:  So … I’ve been in my job for over two years now and they still 
haven’t off ered me any more money. My friends all say I should 
ask for a raise, but I’m not sure. What do you think?
 B:  Well, I dare say that’s OK if it’s a large company, but in a 
small company like the one you work for, it’s a bit more 
tricky because they can’t really increase one person’s pay 
without doing the same for everyone.
 C:  I can see what Matt’s saying, that it’s more di ffi cult in a 
small company, but … I would still say that if you feel you 
deserve a higher salary, you should de finitely mention it.
 A:  Thanks. It’s been great talking to you. It’s really helpful to 
get your views.
77

--- PAGE 76 ---

ANSWER KEY
UNIT 1
Lesson 1A
VOCABULARY
1  1  a (Cry and join do not come 
before to sleep.)
2 b (Hide and pack cannot come 
before a sports club.)
3 a (Waking up and hiding do not 
come before for a taxi.)
4 c (Cry and wait can come before 
him, but they need a preposition 
– cry over someone, wait for 
someone.)
5 a (You can hide or miss a bag, 
but it doesn’t fi t the meaning of 
the sentence.) 
6 a (When you hide something, 
other people can’t fi nd it.)
2A 1 c (switch the lights on)
2 f (get dressed )
3 e (pack some clothes in a bag)
4 d (do the washing up)
5 a (brush my teeth)
6 b (shut all the windows)
2B 1 dressed ( get dressed) 
2 dry (dry my hair)
3 do (do the washing up)
4 away (put away)
5 brush (brush my teeth)
6 shut (windows)
7 lock (the door)
8 switch (off)
GRAMMAR 
3A 1  b (The question is about two 
choices, so c is not possible. 
Option a is not possible as there 
is no of – what kind of drink.)
2 a (The question is asking about 
time.)
3 b (This question needs the verb 
be.)
4 b (The question is asking about 
things, so a is not possible. 
Option c is not possible because 
there is no of – Which sort of.)
5 c (This is a yes/no question with 
the verb live, so we need the 
auxiliary verb do. )
6 c (This is a question about 
distance, so a and b are not 
possible.)
3B 1  Where (The question is asking 
about a place.)
2 is (The question needs be with 
no auxiliary verb.)
3 of (what kind of + noun)
4 Why (The question is asking 
about a reason.)
5 Have (The question uses have 
got – there is no other auxiliary 
verb.)
6 do (The question uses have 
and not have got, so we need 
auxiliary verb do. )
7 far (The question is about 
distance – how far.)
8 Which (The question is asking 
about two choices.)
PRONUNCIATION
4A 1  F (In wh- questions, our 
intonation falls.)
2 F (In wh- questions, our 
intonation falls.)
3 R (In yes/no questions, our 
intonation rises.)
4 R (In yes/no questions, our 
intonation rises.)
5 F (In wh- questions, our 
intonation falls.)
6 R (In yes/no questions, our 
intonation rises.)
READING
5  1  friends (Mark and Hanna 
became friends last year.) 
2 similar (They experienced many 
of the same things in their lives.)
6A 1  ‘They were both born on 26th 
April.’
3 ‘They both went to Newbrook 
Primary School …’
5 ‘they both decided to stay at 
university for another year to 
become teachers’
6 ‘… both live in West London, in 
apartments that are on the fift h 
floor’
7 ‘They both enjoy going to 
museums and art galleries in 
their free time.’
6B 1  1999 (‘Mark was born in 1997 
… Hanna was born … two years 
later’)
2 London (‘Mark was born in … 
London in the UK’)
3 three (‘When Hanna was three, 
her family moved to the UK’)
4 restaurant (‘Mark worked in a 
restaurant’)
5 Glasgow (‘Hanna went to 
Glasgow’)
6 art (‘They studied art for three 
years’)
7 four (‘They studied art for three 
years. Then, they both decided 
to stay at university for another 
year …’)
8 fift h (‘Today, Mark and Hanna 
both live in West London, in 
apartments that are on the fift h 
floor’)
9 museum (‘In fact, they met at a 
museum’)
10 cousin (‘he’s also a friend of 
Hanna’s cousin’)
6C 1 M (He worked in a restaurant.)
2 H (She spent time in Amsterdam 
before university.)
3 H (She works at an adult 
education college)
4 M (He stayed in London to go to 
university there. Hanna went to 
Glasgow.)
5 M (He lives with a friend from 
university. Hanna already lives 
alone.)
Lesson 1B
VOCABULARY
1 1  b (This person talks about 
making a place look good, or 
clean.)
2 c (A dancer might work at a 
theatre).
3 f (A PA does things for a 
manager.)
4 h (A vet works with animals.)
5 e (A factory worker works for a 
company that makes things.)
6 a (Authors write stories.)
7 d (Dentists help people to have 
nice smiles.)
8 g (Tour guides show people 
around a place.)
2A 1 b (We say it’s someone’s job to …)
2 a (Sign can’t come before pay or 
interview.)
3 b (We can’t use job or career 
aft er work in.)
4 c (We can’t use do or sign before 
my own business.)
5 a (Interview and industry can’t be 
higher.)
6 c (Me cannot come a ft er signed 
or developed.)
2B 1 industry ( food industry )
2 career (refers to di ff erent jobs 
aft er university)
3 interviews ( had interviews )
4 off ered (offered me a job)
5 pay (refers to the pay not being 
high)
6 contract (signed the contract)
7 job (my job was to)
8 business (developing my own)
GRAMMAR
3A 1  b (Like is a state verb and isn’t 
usually used in the continuous 
form.)
2 c (This is a present habit.)
3 a (This is an action happening 
now.)
4 c (This is a state verb – it 
describes an opinion.)
3B 1  Are, working (action happening 
now)
2 work (routine)
3 ’m sitting (action happening now)
4 Are, having (action happening 
now)
5 do, make (routine/habit)
6 are, eating (action happening 
now)
7 ’m enjoying (action happening 
now)
78

--- PAGE 77 ---

8 ’s having (action happening now)
9 Does, eat (routine/habit)
10 don’t have (routine/habit)
PRONUNCIATION
4  1 are you doing
2 are you sitting
3 are they talking
4 are we waiting
5 are they living
LISTENING
5  People pay a Japanese man called 
Shoji Morimoto to go out with 
them, because they don’t want to 
be
 go alone. It can could be to a 
restaurant, a party or a wedding. 
One person even paid him to say 
goodbye to them at a bus train 
station when they le ft Tokyo to 
travel move to a diff erent city. 
6A b (‘Brides pay me around £2,000 
to be their friend on their special 
day’)
6B 1  T (‘Sometimes the bride has 
a lot of friends, but they’re 
all very quiet and she needs 
someone who’s a bit more 
exciting’)
2 F (‘At some weddings everyone 
knows that I’m doing a job. At 
other weddings, they think I’m a 
friend or maybe a cousin’)
3 F (‘I meet the bride a few weeks 
before the wedding’)
4 T (‘I couldn’t believe how many 
brides wanted my help!’)
5 F (‘I usually get home feeling 
very tired!’)
6C 1  2,000 (‘Brides pay me around 
£2,000 to be their friend’)
2 arguing (‘My job is to stop 
people from arguing’)
3 five / 5 (‘It was fi ve years ago’)
4 shop (‘I had a very di ff erent job! I 
worked in a shop’)
5 tired (‘I usually get home feeling 
very tired!’)
WRITING
7A 1  a few months (‘I’m working as a 
ski instructor for the winter’)
2 doesn’t work (‘I start teaching 
at 9.45 a.m. and fi nish at 3.30 
p.m.’)
3 with others (‘I’m living in an 
apartment with two other 
teachers’)
4 is (‘The apartment’s not big’)
5 work (‘Are you doing the same 
job?’)
7B 1  d (Here in the second sentence 
refers back to Ban ff in the fi rst 
sentence.)
2 a (That’s because gives a reason 
for feeling tired.)
3 c (One of them refers back to 
one of the two other teachers in 
his apartment.)
4 e (This comes after Jamie asks, 
‘what are you doing these days?’)
5 b (This refers to the questions 
about home and work and is a 
common way to end an email.)
7D Sample answer
Hi Jamie,
I’m really pleased that you’re 
having a good time in Ban ff . It 
sounds fantastic!
I’m living in Florence, Italy at the 
moment. I’m working as an English 
teacher at a summer school for 
young children. I work from 10 
a.m. to 5 p.m. with a two-hour 
lunch break. I’m very tired when I 
get home, so I know how you feel 
about your job!
I’m living on my own. I’m staying 
in a very old, small apartment, 
but I love it! The buildings around 
me are all beautiful and I’ve made 
some good friends. We go out and 
eat and have fun in the evenings. 
Do you go out much in the 
evening? Let me know!
Lesson 1C
VOCABULARY
1A 1 confident (The speaker is sure.)
2 positive (The speaker thinks 
things go well more o ft en than 
they go bad.)
3 afraid (The speaker is afraid of 
falling.)
4 pleased (The speaker is happy 
about getting a new job.)
5 lonely (The speaker doesn’t 
have anyone to talk to.)
6 stressed (The speaker has a lot 
of work to do.)
7 unhappy (The speaker wasn’t 
happy because their food 
arrived late.)
8 interested (The speaker is 
interested in knowing more 
about life in Mozambique.)
1B 1  unhappy (There’s a problem 
with the room.)
2 confident (People don’t feel 
lonely about an exam; they 
feel interested in not about an 
exam.)
3 afraid (The sport is dangerous.)
4 lonely (The speaker lives alone 
and no one visits them.)
5 interested (The speaker wants 
to know more about the trees.)
6 stressed (A ft er tired and, we 
need a negative adjective.)
PRONUNCIATION
2 1 a 2 b 3 b 4 b 5 a 6 b
ANSWER KEY
HOW TO ...
3A 1 T (‘I’m painting my kitchen’)
2 T (‘I’m so tired. I don’t think I can 
finish’)
3 F (‘But I missed the meeting. I 
really wanted to be there’)
4 F (‘Can I give the presentation 
with another student?’)
3B 1 looks, Nice
2 done
3 it
4 on
5 all right
6 Don’t, really
7 understand
8 That’s
SPEAKING
4A 1 mean
2 think
3 worry
4 that’s 
5 well 
6 you’ll 
Lesson 1D
GRAMMAR
1  1  to develop
 developing (enjoy + 
-ing verb)
2 makeing making (verbs ending 
-e, change -e to -ing)
3 cook cooking (don’t mind + -ing 
verb)
4 begining beginning (The stress 
is on the final syllable, so double 
the n.)
5 no sleeping not sleeping (hate + 
not)
6 having to have (’d love + to 
infinitive)
7 to helping helping (don’t/doesn’t 
mind + -ing verb)
8 not like don’t like (don’t/doesn’t 
like = the negative form of like)
2  1 dancing (enjoy + -ing verb)
2 getting (love + -ing verb)
3 getting (hate + -ing verb)
4 doing/to do (Aft er like, it is also 
possible to use to infinitive when 
talking about the present.)
5 to have (’d like + to + infinitive)
6 visiting (enjoy + -ing verb)
7 travelling/to travel (A ft er hate, 
it is also possible to use to 
infinitive when talking about the 
present.) 
8 seeing/to see (A ft er love, 
it is also possible to use to 
infinitive when talking about the 
present.)
9 saying/to say (A ft er hate, 
it is also possible to use to 
infinitive when talking about the 
present.)
10 taking (don’t mind + -ing verb)
11 to use (’d hate + to infinitive)
12 being/to be (A ft er hate, it is also 
possible to use to infinitive when 
talking about the present.)
79

--- PAGE 78 ---

ANSWER KEY
LISTENING
3  Louis’s dislikes: 
walking (‘I hate walking’)
hot chocolate (‘I don’t like hot 
chocolate’)
Monday mornings (‘I don’t like 
getting up for work on Mondays’)
public swimming pools (‘I hate 
swimming in public swimming 
pools’)
Millie’s dislikes: 
Sunday evenings (‘I don’t like 
Sunday evenings’)
baths in summer (‘I don’t like 
having baths in the summer’)
4 1  cold (‘I prefer to stay inside in 
the warm’)
2 doesn’t mind (‘I like winning, but 
I don’t mind losing’)
3 arriving at (‘I like to get to work 
early’)
4 early (‘waking up late at the 
weekend is worse’)
5 showers (‘I prefer to have a 
shower’)
6 enjoys (‘I love swimming in hotel 
pools when I’m on holiday’)
5 1 Let’s go for a walk.
2 I don’t like hot chocolate.
3 You always want to win.
4 I imagine that you like swimming. 
UNIT 2
Lesson 2A
VOCABULARY
1  1  fur (Cats don’t have feathers or 
a trunk.)
2 web (Spiders don’t have or make 
shells or wings.)
3 skin (Elephants don’t have 
feathers or shells.)
4 trunk (Elephants don’t have fur 
or wings.)
5 wings (Butter fl ies don’t have 
shells or make webs.)
6 shell (Tortoises don’t live inside 
their skin or have trunks.)
7 feathers (Birds don’t make webs; 
they have tails, but they don’t 
leave them behind.)
8 tail (Dogs don’t have wings; they 
don’t move their skin up and 
down.)
2  1 dolphin
2 bee
3 rabbit
4 frog
5 tiger
6 snake
7 butter fly
8 wolf
GRAMMAR
3A 1 b (The action was in progress.)
2 b (These two actions happened 
in time order, not at the same 
time.)
3 a (This is a question about an 
action in progress.)
4 c (This comes before the past 
simple; while comes before the 
past continuous; what doesn’t 
fit the meaning.)
3B 1  was walking (an action in 
progress)
2 had (a state verb, so used in the 
simple form)
3 didn’t hear (a state verb so used 
in the simple form)
4 made, were walking (the second 
action was in progress when the 
first happened)
5 was crossing, fell (the fi rst 
action was in progress when the 
second happened)
6 found, took (two actions that 
happened in time order, not at 
the same time) 
3C 1  were you doing (action in 
progress)
2 was playing (action in progress) 
3 was walking (action in progress)
4 heard (action that happened 
when walking home was in 
progress)
5 was lying (action in progress)
6 did you do (ask about a past 
finished action)
7 called (past fi nished action)
8 came (past fi nished action)
9 spoke (past fi nished action)
10 told (past fi nished action)
PRONUNCIATION
4  1 were you playing
2 were you speaking
3 was he asking
4 were they talking
5 was he getting
6 was she doing
LISTENING
5A 1  a (‘got on his bike and travelled 
to Amsterdam’)
2 h (‘He travelled through 
Belgium, Greece and Italy’)
3 c (Dean was travelling from 
Bosnia and Herzegovina to 
Montenegro’)
4 e (‘He was riding up a hill’)
5 b (‘When he looked behind him, 
he saw a little cat’)
6 g (‘and took her to a vet’s o ffi ce’)
7 f (‘He can now that Nala has a 
pet passport’)
8 d (‘They’ve travelled to thirty 
countries’)
5B 1  c (‘but he was bored of working 
nine to five every day’)
2 c (‘Dean was travelling from 
Bosnia and Herzegovina to 
Montenegro’)
3 b (‘he wanted to know about the 
cat’s owner’)
4 a (‘Nala taught him to take his 
time and do things more slowly’)
5 c (‘There are some places they 
can’t go, because you can’t 
always take a cat into hotels’) 
6 c (‘Dean’s got a website, but his 
story is in a book he wrote’)
5C 1 I just watched a lovely video. 
2 The cat was running behind the 
bike.
3 He stops more oft en these days.
4 There are some places they 
can’t go.
WRITING
6A 1  dog (‘I was out running when I 
saw a dog’)
2 house (‘in the window of 
someone’s house’)
3 phone (‘The owner used his 
phone to open the front door.’)
6B 1  Just then (very soon a ft er the 
writer saw the dog)
2 First (This is the fi rst action the 
writer took.)
3 Then (This is the next action the 
writer took.)
4 Later (the time a ft er the fi re 
service arrived)
6D  Sample answer
Last month, my friend Marco and 
I were walking through a park 
when we heard a sound. It was 
coming from above us. We looked 
up and there was a cat in a tree. 
It was high and it couldn’t get 
down. First, Marco tried to climb 
the tree, but he didn’t get very 
far. Next, I tried. I got higher, but 
it wasn’t enough so we called the 
fire service. 
Later, a small fi re truck arrived. A 
firewoman climbed the tree and 
brought the cat down. I walked 
over to the cat. Just then, it 
jumped out of the fi rewoman’s 
hands and ran o ff . We never saw it 
again but I’m sure it was pleased! 
Lesson 2B
VOCABULARY
1  1 fl y out
2 change
3 fl ight
4 take off
5 delay
6 due to arrive
7 land
8 arrival time
9 made a reservation
2A 1  a (A check-in desk is where you 
get your boarding passes.)
2 b (This is where machines check 
your bags.)
3 a (This is where you wait to 
board a plane.)
4 b (= get on the plane)
80

--- PAGE 79 ---

ANSWER KEY
5 c (Passport control is where 
someone checks your passport.)
6 c (This is where people check 
your luggage for things you 
shouldn’t bring into a country.)
2B 1 Check (check-in desk)
2 boarding (boarding pass )
3 Security (the place where your 
bags go through a machine)
4 lounge (departure lounge)
5 board (board a plane))
6 control (passport control )
7 get (off the plane)
8 Baggage (baggage reclaim )
9 Customs (where they check 
you’re not bringing certain 
things into the country)
10 Arrivals (where people arrive 
aft er taking a fl ight)
GRAMMAR
3A 1  the seat (the second time the 
speaker talks about the seat) 
2 The fl ight (talking about a 
specific fl ight)
3 time (talking generally about an 
uncountable noun time)
4 the Sahara (a desert)
5 in the morning (fixed phrase in 
the morning)
6 the train station (the speaker 
and listener know what train 
station)
3B 1 – (place name)
2 – (talking generally about 
tourists)
3 the (name of a sea)
4 the (both the writer and reader 
understand which car)
5 the (both the writer and reader 
understand which map)
6 – (talking generally about 
diff erent choices)
7 the (both the writer and reader 
understand it’s the road they 
are on)
8 The (both the writer and reader 
understand which sea)
9 the (fixed phrase, in the evening )
10 – (talking generally about 
safety)
PRONUNCIATION
4  1 W (before a consonant sound)
2 S (before a vowel sound)
3 S (before a vowel sound)
4 W (before a consonant sound)
5 S (before a vowel sound)
6 W (before a consonant sound)
READING
5  1 C (‘I couldn’t fi nd my passport’)
2 D (‘I saw that my purse wasn’t in 
my bag’)
3 B (‘I couldn’t fi nd my phone 
anywhere’)
4 A (‘my wedding ring wasn’t on 
my finger’)
6A 1  T (‘I asked people around me to 
look for it’)
2 F (‘she was fi ne about it’)
3 T (‘She bought me a new ring 
when we got home’)
4 T (‘while I was putting my 
youngest child in his car seat’)
5 F (‘I was very upset about it at 
the time’)
6 F (‘We went back to the hotel, 
but it wasn’t there’)
7 F (‘My friends had jobs to go to 
so they went home’)
8 F (‘I wasn’t pleased, but I felt 
worse when I got home and 
found my lost passport at the 
bottom of my bag’)
9 T (‘I got off the plane very 
quickly’)
10 T (‘Aft er an hour, someone 
brought me my purse’)
6B 1  pool (‘I went down to the pool 
alone’)
2 take photos (‘I wanted to take 
photos’)
3 husband (‘We found it when my 
husband drove over it’)
4 week (‘We had a fantastic week 
in Tijuana’)
5 arrivals hall (‘In the arrivals 
halls, I saw that my purse wasn’t 
in my bag’)
6 airline desk (‘I went to the airline 
desk and told them the problem’)
6C 1  Alice (She put her phone on top 
of the car.)
2 Lucas (He didn’t check his 
bag carefully and thought his 
passport was lost.)
3 Emi (She didn’t check her seat 
and left her purse on the plane.)
4 Darius (He’s going to leave his 
wedding ring at home so he 
doesn’t lose it again.)
Lesson 2C
VOCABULARY
1A 1 b (make a note)
2 a (hold the door open for 
someone)
3 a (carry your suitcase ; you carry 
something to another place)
4 c (hold someone’s hand )
5 b (take a look)
6 c (bring someone some co ffee; 
take means ‘to another place’)  
1B 1 take (take a break)
2 cancelled (cancel an 
appointment)
3 answered (answer emails)
4 brought (bring someone
something)
5 carried (carry a tray )
6 made (make appointments)
7 answered (answer the phone)
HOW TO ...
2A 1  a (‘I need to clean … Do you 
want me to help you?’)
2 b (‘Do you want me to actually 
cancel it? Or do you want to 
change it to a diff erent day?’)
3 a (‘Let me talk to him fi rst.’)
2B 1 Do you want me to help you?
2 Yes, please. That would be 
great. 
3 I can do the washing up. 
4 I’ll put all these cups in the 
kitchen. 
5 Do you want me to cancel it?
6 Shall I book the one on the 
24th?
7 Do you want me to email you 
the information? 
8 Thank you, but I’m OK.
9 Shall I talk to her?
10 That’s kind of you.
11 Let me talk to him fi rst.
12 OK, that’s a great help.
PRONUNCIATION
3  2, 3, 5 are polite. 
SPEAKING
4B 1 Shall
2 can
3 good
4 go
5 want
6 but
7 Let
Lesson 2D
GRAMMAR
1  1  e (both refers to Nina and Sharif )
2 b (refers to two of our friends )
3 a (all of us refers to the team)
4 f (most of them refers to flowers)
5 d (refers to my friends)
6 c (refers to one of the children)
2  1  none (But tells us it’s a 
negative.)
2 Both (The speaker is the 
youngest of three people.)
3 them (Them refers to the 
meetings.)
4 you (The speaker is talking to a 
group of people.)
5 the (This is talking about 
specific people.)
6 all (all comes before the verb.)
READING
3A b (walk away, turn off y our phone 
or computer, do exercise, do 
something you enjoy, talk to 
someone)
3B 1  small (‘These are not huge 
problems’)
2 sometimes (‘It’s not always 
possible of course’)
3 turning off phones (‘we can 
switch them o ff ’)
4 regularly (‘we should all make 
time for a daily walk in our lives’)
81

--- PAGE 80 ---

ANSWER KEY
5 good (‘That’s o ft en good for us’)
6 talking (‘Perhaps the most 
important thing is to talk to 
other people about how we feel’)
7 don’t always (‘Talk to friends, 
family, a doctor or join a club’)
8 diff erent (‘We just need to fi nd 
what works for us’)
4  1  real (‘we can’t seem to speak to 
a real person’)
2 lecture (‘We can’t always walk 
out of a … university lecture’)
3 walk (‘We should all make time 
for a daily walk in our lives’)
4 switch (‘It can help to switch o ff 
stress’)
5 club (‘or join a club’)
REVIEW 1–2
GRAMMAR
1A 1  How much does this T-shirt cost? 
2 What sort of work do you do? 
3 Where are your parents today? 
4 How far is your house from here? 
5 Do you want to sit here? 
6 Do you have any good ideas?  
1B 1 What is your date of birth?
2 Do you like this song?
3 How many bikes does Leo have?
4 Are Tom and Luke brothers?
5 What kind of videos do you like?
6 How old is your cat?
2  1 is living (activity happening now)
2 ’s working (activity happening 
around now)
3 likes (present state)
4 works (habit)
5 enjoys (habit)
6 ’s playing (activity happening 
around now)
7 don’t work (routine)
3  1  going/to go (We can use both 
forms when talking about the 
present.)
2 working (don’t mind + -ing verb)
3 to travel (would love + to 
infinitive)
4 making (enjoy + -ing verb)
5 doing/to do (We can use both 
forms when talking about the 
present.)
6 swimming/to swim (We can use 
both forms when talking about 
the present.)
7 to have (’d hate + to + infinitive)
8 joining/to join (We can use both 
forms when talking about the 
present.)
4  1 was eating (action in progress)
2 woke (action that happened 
when another action was in 
progress)
3 watched (two actions that 
happened in time order)
4 when (while comes before the 
past continuous)
5 were starting ( people = they)
6 was getting (past continuous = 
was/were + -ing verb)
7 went (action that happened 
when another action was in 
progress)
8 was still sleeping (action in 
progress at a speci fic past time)
5  1  the (fixed phrase – in the 
mornings)
2 the (fixed phrase – in the 
evenings)
3 – (talking generally about 
plants)
4 – (talking generally about other 
pets)
5 the (talking about a speci fic 
type)
6 – (a continent)
7 – (talking generally about 
sunlight)
8 – (talking generally about water)
9 – (talking generally about 
tortoises)
10 the (There is only one ground .)
6  1 b 2 a 3 a 4 a 5 c 6 b 
VOCABULARY
7  1 wake 
2 shut 
3 brush
4 pack
5 switch
6 put
7 lock
8 dry
9 join
10 miss
8  1  career (talking about a number 
of jobs)
2 factory worker (putting things in 
boxes)
3 off ered (off er someone a job)
4 job (It was my job)
5 PA (a personal assistant works 
for a company manager)
6 pay (refers to money)
7 develop (sign isn’t possible)
8 author (someone who writes 
blog posts)
9 off ered (off er someone a place 
on a course)
9  1 e 2 d 3 a 4 f 5 b 6 c
 10  1 r abbit, rat
2 bear, wolf
3 butter fly, fl y
4 bird, chicken
5 crocodile, whale
 11  1 delay 
2 changed 
3 security 
4 boarding passes 
5 landed 
6 departure lounge 
7 baggage reclaim 
8 due to arrive 
 12  1 C ancel 
2 make
3 Make
4 carry
5 Take
6 answer
7 Answer
8 Bring
9 take
UNIT 3
Lesson 3A
VOCABULARY
1A 1  b
2 c
3 c 
4 b
5 a
6 b
1B 1  explained (explain something to 
someone)
2 plan (plan something better )
3 describe (describe habits)
4 search for (search for something 
online)
5 Decide (decide on something)
6 discover (discover something 
about yourself )
7 develop (develop a system)
8 expect (expect something to 
happen)
2  1 engineering
2 education
3 information technology
4 geography
5 business studies
6 politics
7 medicine
8 tourism
GRAMMAR
3A 1 c (= it’s necessary)
2 a (= it’s prohibited)
3 b (= it’s not necessary)
4 a (= it’s prohibited)
3B 1 have to learn (= it’s necessary)
2 can’t copy work (= it’s not OK)
3 doesn’t have to help me (= it 
isn’t necessary)
4 can’t use (= it’s not OK)
5 don’t have to read this book (= it 
isn’t necessary)
6 Do we have to do (= Is it 
necessary?)
7 can’t sit here (= it’s not OK)
8 Do I have to finish (= Is it 
necessary?)
PRONUNCIATION
4  1 have to see
2 have to finish
3 have to go
4 have to
5 have to work
6 have to come 
82

--- PAGE 81 ---

ANSWER KEY
READING
5  3 (‘Get a book without spending a 
penny’)
6A a  book 3 (‘It’s the perfect place 
for starting again and spending 
more time with her favourite 
hobby of painting. She soon 
realizes that she made a great 
decision.’)
b  book 1 (‘she needs to run and 
hide’)
c  book 4 (‘the Stone family are all 
together’)
d book 2 (‘17-year-old Theo’)
6B 1  a (‘But aft er one mistake at the 
airport, now she has a suitcase 
… that isn’t hers’)
2 b (‘Theo has to decide whether 
to continue his plan to leave the 
farm or stay’)
3 b (Maribel is alone.)
4 a (‘Each person has secrets 
that no one else knows about 
– secrets that will change their 
lives forever.’)
6C 1  hotel (‘A message in her hotel 
room’), restaurant (‘Can the 
man she met at a restaurant 
help her?’)
2 lonely (‘He’s lonely), sky (‘he 
sees an unusual light in the sky’)
3 painting (‘spending more time 
with her favourite hobby of 
painting’), village (‘she decides 
to move away to a house in a 
small village by the sea’)
4 snow storm (‘When a snow 
storm comes’), secrets (‘Each 
person has secrets that no one 
else knows about – secrets that 
will change their lives forever’)
Lesson 3B
VOCABULARY
1A 1  b (Only brilliant comes a ft er 
really.)
2 c (Only delicious describes the 
taste of food.)
3 b (Only clever matches makes 
you think.)
4 a (Only favourite follows My.)
5 a (Only exciting describes the 
feeling of watching sport.)
6 a (Only real goes with person .)
1B 1 favourite 
2 popular 
3 real 
4 brilliant 
5 equal 
6 exciting 
7 clever 
PRONUNCIATION
2  
: real
  : brilliant, clever, equal, favourite
    :  popular (brilliant can also go 
here)
    : delicious, exciting
GRAMMAR
3  1 c (object question)
2 a (subject question)
3 b (object question)
4 a (object question)
5 c (subject question)
6 b (subject question)
4  1  What did you do last night? 
(object question)
2 Who played the main part? 
(subject question)
3 Who directed it? (subject 
question)
4 When did it come out? (object 
question)
5 Where did you watch it? (object 
question)
6 Who paid for your laptop? 
(subject question)
7 What did you think of the fi lm? 
(object question)
LISTENING
5  b (‘I love watching fi lms that teach 
you something’)
6A 1  W (‘I learnt a lot about English 
history when I watched The Last 
Kingdom’)
2 M (‘It’s a fi lm about African 
American women who worked 
for NASA’)
3 M (‘One fi lm taught me what 
to do if you have a very small 
kitchen fi re’)
4 W (‘it was important to find good 
friends and work as a team’)
5 M (‘It made me cry at the end’)
6B 1  T (‘King Alfred was in it. He was 
real’)
2 T (‘That’s the problem … We 
don’t know exactly what was 
real’)
3 F (‘I think fi lms teach us more 
about now than the past’)
4 T (‘they’re actually very 
important for children when 
they’re growing up’)
5 T (‘It was really sad. It made me 
cry at the end’)
6C 1 A TV show taught me to cook.
2 I learnt about cars from TV.
3 We never watch television in the 
evenings. 
4 You have to watch this 
programme.
WRITING
7A A
7B The photo show
 shows an actor in 
a film studio. he’s He’s wearing a 
dark suit and a white shirt. There 
are lights with umbrellas next of  
to him. On In front of him, there’s 
a television camera and a man. 
The man is moveing moving the 
camera.  On the le ft , there’s a 
man and a woman. They’re look  
looking at the actor. Behind them, 
there are some clothes. 
8B Sample answer
The photo shows a drama class in 
a theatre. There are four students 
and they’re practising a play.  Two 
of the students are standing on a 
box. One of them is acting. He’s 
reaching for something with his 
right hand. The other students are 
looking at him. All of the students 
are holding a book in their hands. 
Behind the students, there are 
lots of seats. Above the students, 
there are some bright lights.
8C Students’ own answers
Lesson 3C
VOCABULARY
1A 1 on (put something on the wall)
2 in (put something in the fridge 
to keep it cold)
3 above (clouds are above a 
house)
4 outside (leave something 
outside a building)
5 out of (get out of a building)
6 over (use a bridge to cross a 
river)
7 inside (keep something inside a 
cupboard)
8 around (walk around a place)
9 into (go into a building)
10 forwards (move something 
forwards)
1B 1  a (beside needs an object; you 
can’t stand towards someone)
2 c (a coff ee table cannot be 
inside-out or move up and down )
3 c (walk up and down a street/
road; walk forwards to a place)
4 b (we can’t jump altogether or 
inside-out)
5 b (from follows move away )
6 a (forwards and up and down 
come aft er walk, run, move, etc.)
HOW TO ...
2A 1  c (‘You can make a watering can 
… make some holes in the top of 
the bottle’)
2 a (‘You should put car wax on it’)
3 b (‘We can put the plastic toys 
in the dishwasher’)
2B 1 First
2 Aft er that
3 right
4 meant
5 word
6 have
7 don’t
8 need 
9 Always put
10 like
11 now
12 sure
PRONUNCIATION
3  1 U 2 U 3 U 4 U 5 D 6 D
83

--- PAGE 82 ---

ANSWER KEY
SPEAKING
4A 1 understand
2 First
3 Like this
4 Aft er that
5 that
6 this
7 next
Lesson 3D
GRAMMAR
1  1 had to (= it was necessary)
2 couldn’t (= it was prohibited)
3 didn’t have to (= it wasn’t 
necessary)
4 didn’t have to (= it wasn’t 
necessary)
5 couldn’t (= it was prohibited)
6 had to (= it was necessary)
2  1  I didn’t have to stay late at work 
yesterday.
2 We couldn’t use the road this 
morning.
3 Did you have to take the bus 
yesterday?
4 My brother didn’t have to go to 
school today.
5 We didn’t have to have our 
weekly team meeting today.
6 Sandro couldn’t answer my 
messages at school today.
7 Did Alison have to work last 
week? 
8 I had to wear a shirt and jacket 
at school.
9 Why did you have to work 
today?
10 We couldn’t get a table at the 
restaurant.
LISTENING
3A b
3B 1 c (‘I think I was four in mine’)
2 c (‘from around seven, they 
start to lose those memories’)
3 a (‘You had a strong positive 
feeling when you boarded your 
first fl ight’) 
4 b (‘I think that’s a brilliant idea’)
3C 1  fl ight (‘my first memory is of 
boarding a fl ight’)
2 water (‘I was playing with some 
water’)
3 bodies (‘our bodies are still 
growing at that young age’)
4 exciting (‘I don’t think it was 
particularly exciting!’)
5 box (‘There’s also a memory 
box’)
UNIT 4
Lesson 4A
VOCABULARY
1A 1 made
2 ride
3 drunk
4 do
5 had
6 leave
7 run
8 written
1B 1 been
2 seen
3 slept
4 swum
5 met
6 won
7 read
8 bought
9 eaten
10 driven
PRONUNCIATION
2  1 d 2 c 3 a 4 b 5 f 6 e
GRAMMAR
3A 1  c (past participle of have in 
present perfect)
2 a (ever is used in questions)
3 b (past simple – we know when)
4 b (past experience with no 
specific time period; Amara = 
she)
5 a (past simple – we know when)
6 c (past experience with no 
specific time period)
3B 1 ’ve never done (no speci fic time)
2 ’ve never been (no speci fic time)
3 ’ve never seen (no speci fic time)
4 haven’t danced (no specific time)
5 wrote (specific time)
6 ’ve made (no specific time)
7 made (specific time)
8 ’ve ridden (no speci fic time)
9 rode (specific time)
10 ’ve eaten (no speci fic time)
11 bought (specific time)
12 liked (specific time)
3C 1  He’s gone on a boat trip. (Ryan 
is still there now)
2 Have you ever been on a fishing 
trip? (no specific time)
3 No, I haven’t (no speci fic time)
4 I went on one last year. (speci fic 
time)
5 I didn’t catch any fi sh. (specific 
time)
6 I’ve never done it before. (no 
specific time)
7 I went camping a lot. (speci fic 
time)
8 I’ve never slept outside.
LISTENING
4A Brett Carmen
been on a radio 
show
won a 
competition
won money
been to 
Northern 
Ireland
been on 
television
4B 1  didn’t tell (‘I didn’t tell any of my 
friends. Or family’)
2 second (‘I came second’)
3 year (‘I want to buy a new 
camera at the end of the year’)
4 writing (‘I won a writing 
competition when I was seven 
years old’)
5 Ireland (‘Where did you take it? 
/ In Northern Ireland’)
6 news (‘I was on a local news 
programme’)
7 doesn’t remember (‘What 
questions? … I don’t 
remember’)
8 Carmen’s friend (‘They didn’t 
show my friend. She wasn’t very 
happy’)
4C 1  photo (‘I entered a photo 
competition’)
2 250 (What did you win? / £250’)
3 business (‘it was a business trip’) 
4 cinema (‘We went to the cinema 
one evening and when we were 
leaving’)
5 film (‘someone asked us some 
questions about the fi lm’)
6 head (‘My friend’s television was 
huge. My head looked really big!’)
4D 1 I didn’t tell any of my friends.
2 I didn’t expect to win.
3 My friend’s television was huge.
4 They didn’t show my friend. 
WRITING
5A 1 Five / 5 (‘I ran fi ve kilometres’)
2 Fift y-five / 55 (‘It took me fift y-
five minutes’)
3 No (‘I never want to run again’)
5B 1 Although
2 so
3 but
4 because
5 but
6C Sample answer
About five years ago, I flew a 
small plane. My partner bought 
me a lesson because it was my 
birthday. I love flying planes in 
video games and I wanted to try 
and do it in real life. I took a friend 
with me. He sat in the back and I 
sat in the front with the pilot. The 
pilot explained some things to me 
and then we took o ff . I flew the 
plane! It was amazing, although I 
got travel sick. The plane moved 
up and down a lot because it was 
small and I felt really bad. So, I’d 
love to take another lesson, but I 
don’t think I can.  
Lesson 4B
VOCABULARY
1A 1  b (Quick doesn’t come before 
direction or travel.)
2 b (Air doesn’t come before trips 
or way.)
84

--- PAGE 83 ---

ANSWER KEY
3 a (We talk about a border 
between one country and 
another.) 
4 c (Day doesn’t come before 
travel or journey.)
5 c (faster route to a place )
6 b (Only journey comes before 
from.)
1B 1  borders (= the lines between 
countries)
2 way (making his way through)
3 distance ( great distance)
4 direction (in the direction of )
5 travel (travel industry )
6 tours (take people on tours)
7 journey (helicopter journey )
2  1  Sweden is on the border of 
Norway and Finland.
2 China is on the other side of the 
world to Brazil.
3 California is on the west coast 
of the US.
4 Oman is on the other side of the 
Arabian Sea to India.
5 Istanbul is in the west of Turkey.
6 Paris isn’t on the coast.
7 Ethiopia is on the east coast of 
Africa.
8 You can stop in Nicaragua 
on your way to Mexico from 
Ecuador. 
GRAMMAR
3A 1  b (With short adjectives ending 
with a consonant, vowel and 
consonant, we double the fi nal 
consonant.)
2 c (To make a superlative with 
adjectives ending in - y, we 
remove the -y and add -iest.)
3 a (the same as)
4 c (superlative adjective + noun + 
to infinitive)
3B 1 the best (superlative, irregular)
2 the easiest (superlative, 
adjective ending in - y changes 
to -y + -iest)
3 cheaper (comparative, short 
adjective changes to add - er)
4 more expensive (comparative, 
long adjective changes to 
become more + adjective)
5 the safest (superlative, short 
adjective ending in - e changes 
to add -st)
6 more comfortable (comparative, 
long adjective changes to 
become more + adjective)
7 safer (comparative, short 
adjective ending in - e changes 
to add -er)
8 quicker (comparative, short 
adjective changes to add - er)
9 most interesting (superlative, 
long adjective changes to 
become most + adjective)
PRONUNCIATION
4  1  Which is better, the beach or the 
mountains?
2 Where’s the most popular travel 
destination?
3 Who is funnier, your sister or 
your brother?
4 What is the cheapest way to 
travel? 
READING
5A 1  Iceland (‘The Best of Iceland 
Tour’)
2 Seven / 7 (‘Spend seven days on 
this beautiful island’)
3 Reykjavik (‘Day 1 – Reykjavik … 
Day 7 – Vik to Reykjavik’)
5B 1  F (‘look for the Northern Lights 
in the sky in winter and enjoy 
the midnight sun in summer’)
2 T (It was £1,850 but now it’s 
£1,500)
3 T (‘… with breakfast’)
4 F (‘This does not include your 
fl ight to Iceland’)
5 T (‘Small groups. No more than 
twelve people per group’)
6 T (‘Great tour guides’)
7 F (‘Comfortable bus with free 
wifi’)
8 T (‘What do you need to bring? 
Clothes for warm and cold 
weather’)
5C a  Day 3 (‘Akureyi is … the biggest 
town in the north of Iceland’)
b Day 5 (‘you can see local 
wildlife’)
c Day 2 (‘It has some interesting 
history’)
d Day 6 (‘you visit Diamond beach 
with its black sand’)
e Day 1 (‘Visit the interesting 
concert hall’)
f Day 4 (‘visit the baths, with their 
natural hot water’)
Lesson 4C
VOCABULARY
1A 1 a (get a gift from someone)
2 a (unusual is the opposite of 
normal)
3 c (get someone a gift)
4 a (We can’t use low with gi ft; we 
need to use the before best gi ft.)
5 c (low is the only word we use 
with price)
6 b (receive a gift from someone.) 
1B 1 b (buy someone a present)
2 d (unusual thing)
3 a (received a lovely gift)
4 f (low price)
5 e (get someone a car)
6 c (buy something special for 
someone)
HOW TO ...
2A a video game (‘What about getting 
him a video game?’)
mugs (‘How about some mugs?’)
a book (‘We could get a book. 
Something with lots of interesting 
recipes that he can make.’)
a cooking lesson (‘Why don’t we 
get him a cooking lesson?’)
2B 1  next week (‘Sam’s moving into 
his own fl at next week’)
2 video games (‘What about 
getting him a video game? 
/ I think we need to get him 
something for his new home’)
3 plant (‘How about a plant? / 
That’s fi ne with me, but it’s not 
a very exciting idea’)
4 mugs (‘How about some mugs? 
/ I’m sure he’s already got 
some’)
5 cook (‘I know that he isn’t a very 
good cook, but wants to learn 
how to be one.’)
6 cooking school (‘I’m sure there’s 
a cooking school not too far 
away / I’ve found their website’)
2C 1 What can we getting
 get him? 
2 So, what we shall shall we get 
him? 
3 That’s fi ne of with me, but it’s 
not a very exciting idea.
4 Where we should should we 
look for one?
5 Why don’t we going go there 
later? 
6 Do you think he would liking  like 
that? 
7 Sounds good to me. 
8 We should to speak to Paola.
PRONUNCIATION
3  1 I 2 N 3 I 4 I 5 N
SPEAKING
4A 1 could
2 sure
3 getting
4 fine
5 a bit
6 don’t
7 Sounds
8 go
9 idea
Lesson 4D
GRAMMAR
1  1  b (We can’t taste or smell cold 
weather.)
2 c (Sugar doesn’t change the 
smell or feel of tea.)
3 c (We can’t ‘sound’ something in 
the air; look at something in the 
air.)
4 b (What does … look like?)
5 a (We can’t smell or feel a 
noise.)
6 c (What is … like?)
2  1 What does it smell like? 
2 It smells fresh.
85

--- PAGE 84 ---

ANSWER KEY
3 It looks nice, too.
4 What does it look like inside?
5 What does it taste like?
6 it tastes good.
READING
3  1  Lancashire hotpot (‘There’s one 
dish that always makes me think 
of home: Lancashire hotpot’)
2 Lancashire (‘Lancashire is 
an area in the north west of 
England, close to Manchester’)
3 carrots (‘hotpot is a dish with 
meat, onions, and carrots’)
4  1  factory workers (‘there were a 
lot of factories there, and many 
people in the area worked at 
them … So they made hot pot’)
2 easy to make (‘They could put 
the food in a pot in the oven in 
the morning and leave it to cook 
slowly’)
3 Not everyone (‘many of those 
people had no oven in their 
homes’)
4 are (‘onions, and carrots and 
slices of potato’)
5 isn’t (‘Everyone makes it a bit 
diff erently so there’s no single 
recipe’)
6 at weekends (‘my parents o ft en 
made it for Sunday lunch’)
7 wasn’t (‘We had some di ffi cult 
times’)
8 isn’t (‘they prefer pizza’)
REVIEW 3–4
GRAMMAR
1 1 have to start (= it’s necessary)
2 have to book (= it’s necessary)
3 don’t have to wear (= it’s not 
necessary)
4 can’t wear (= it’s prohibited)
5 can’t listen (= it’s prohibited)
6 can’t eat (= it’s prohibited)
7 have to be (= it’s necessary)
8 have to introduce (= it’s 
necessary)
9 don’t have to bring (= it’s not 
necessary)
2  1 did you live (object question)
2 took you (subject question)
3 cooks (subject question)
4 did you move (object question)
5 does Anna (object question)
6 makes (subject question)
3  1  c (didn’t have to + infinitive = it 
was necessary)
2 b (couldn’t + infinitive = it was 
prohibited)
3 b (had to + infinitive = it was 
necessary)
4 a (did + subject + have to + 
infinitive for a question form)
4  1  have been (past experience, no 
specific time)
2 has never had (past experience, 
no specific time)
3 met (finished past event, 
specific time)
4 has met (past experience, no 
specific time)
5 Did you enjoy (finished past 
event, speci fic time)
6 went (finished past event, 
specific time)
7 Has he gone (asking about past 
experience, no speci fic time)
8 Have you ever seen (past 
experience, no speci fic time)
5  1 best 
2 from 
3 the quietest 
4 the most popular 
5 the busiest
6 further 
7 to 
8 quieter 
9 more expensive than 
10 the most fantastic
6  1 tastes
2 look
3 feels
4 smells
5 taste
6 looks
7 sounds
8 feeling
VOCABULARY
7  1 search 
2 explain
3 discover
4 develop
5 plan
6 describe
7 expect
8 decide
8  1 h 3 d 5 b 7 g 
2 f 4 e 6 c 8 a 
9 1 away from 
2 outside 
3 above 
4 inside-out
5 together 
6 beside
7 around 
8 onto 
 10  1 g iven
2 swum
3 bought
4 ridden
5 seen
6 driven
7 caught
8 won
9 taught
10 drunk
 11  1 t rip
2 way
3 border
4 coast
5 side
6 journey
7 route
8 distance
9 travel
 12  1 r eceived
2 favourite
3 special
4 present
5 exciting
6 get
UNIT 5
Lesson 5A
VOCABULARY
1A 1  c (A price can increase, but not 
cost or spend.)
2 a (A price can be fair, but not 
valuable or expensive.)
3 b (We can rent a car, but not 
increase or offer a car.)
4 a (We need savings to buy a 
more expensive item.)
5 a (a few + offers, but not money 
or savings)
6 b (spend on, not in or at)
1B 1 cost 
2 spent 
3 fair 
4 valuable 
5 off er
6 rent
7 increase
8 savings
GRAMMAR
2A 1 c (possessive pronoun yours =  
 y our bag)
2 b (object pronoun him = David)
3 a (possessive adjective our 
comes before noun cake)
4 c (refers back to 6 p.m.)
2B 1  mine (possessive pronoun mine 
= my wallet)
2 her (object pronoun her = 
Melanie) 
3 that (= an old friend giving me 
flowers)
4 its (possessive adjective for an 
animal when we don’t know the 
gender)
5 theirs (possessive pronoun 
theirs = my parent’s apartment)
6 then (= this evening)
7 Who’s (Who is = question about 
a person)
8 Mine (possessive pronoun = my 
house) 
2C 1  these/those (= umbrellas, 
mobile phones, etc.)
2 there (= the Transport for 
London Lost Property O ffi ce)
3 them (= the thousand things 
that arrive each day)
4 whose (= the person it belongs 
to)
5 it (= the thing they lost)
6 its (= the lost thing’s)
7 them (= the owner – we use 
them because we don’t know if 
the owner is male or female)
8 their (= the owner’s – we use 
their because we don’t know if 
the owner is male or female)
9 that (= a hundred years)
PRONUNCIATION
3  /s/ books, its, Matt’s, scarf, this
/z/ is, ours, theirs, whose, yours
READING
4A 1 c (‘he found an old video game’)
2 a (‘They also found a painting 
there … by the famous Italian 
artist Caravaggio’)
3 d (‘Terry Herbert went out … 
to a farmer’s fi eld … found 
something gold’)
4 b (‘A British woman bought 
an old ring … discovered the 
diamond was real’)
86

--- PAGE 85 ---

ANSWER KEY
LISTENING
4  Slow cities are where people can 
have a slower life. They can walk 
or cycle around about. There are 
green spaces places for people 
to visit. The food in restaurants 
and supermarkets is always  often 
local and organic and people enjoy 
healthy eating living. People also 
care about the culture of the city.
5A 1  d (‘You made a big change to 
your working week last year’)
2 e (‘And how is your free time 
diff erent with a slow life?’)
3 a (‘Slow food is part of a slow 
life’)
4 c (‘Nature is also a big part of a 
slow life’)
5 b (What’s the fi rst thing I can 
do?’)
5B 1  b (‘But we can do things 
diff erently’)
2 b (‘I can now work Tuesday to 
Friday’)
3 a (‘I try to put my phone away’)
4 c (‘Once a week, we eat without 
talking’)
5 b (‘I run every morning through 
a park and make sure I pay 
attention to the trees and 
plants’)
6 a (‘It’s better to have one or two 
goals and complete them by the 
end of the day, rather than have 
twenty goals and not fi nish any 
of them’)
5C 1  rent (‘Even tiny apartments in 
New York are very expensive to 
rent’)
2 Friday (‘I can now work Tuesday 
to Friday’)
3 bad (‘Something that’s NOT 
social media!’)
4 the TV (‘In the past, my wife and 
I ate at diff erent times with the 
TV on’)
5 twenty (‘It’s better to have one 
or two goals and complete 
them by the end of the day, 
rather than have twenty goals 
and not fi nish any of them’)
6  1 I still work from home.
2 Once a week, we eat without 
talking.
3 I run every morning through a 
park.
4 I grow plants in my apartment.
Lesson 5C
VOCABULARY
1A 1 c (Only a colour is bright.)
2 b (Something is di ffi cult to carry 
when it’s heavy.)
3 b (Heavy and thick  don’t 
describe colour.)
4B 1  F (‘visiting the house he grew up 
in’)
2 F (‘Scott sold it for $9,000 and 
used the money for a family 
trip’)
3 T (‘Aft er five years, the owners 
learnt that the painting was  
by …’)
4 F (‘we don’t know who or how 
much they paid’)
5 F (‘Herbert and the farmer 
shared the money’)
6 F (‘A British woman bought an 
old ring’)
4C 1  gift ( ‘It was probably a gi ft to 
him when he was young’)
2 400 (‘it was over 400 years old’)
3 4,000 (‘Later, he had more than 
4,000 things’)
4 neighbour (‘The neighbour … 
asked the woman to check if the 
ring was valuable’)
WRITING
5A c (He found Michael Jordan’s old 
basketball shoe that ‘could be 
worth up to $20,000’)
5B 1  there (= the old shopping 
centre)
2 them (= the basketball shoes)
3 this (= they were the shoes of 
famous players)
4 them (= the shoes)
5 his (= Michael Jordan’s)
6 his (= Michael Jordan’s)
7 This (= Jordan wore the shoe 
early in his career)
8 It (= the shoe)
6C Sample answer
An English man called Paul 
Raynard was visiting Ballycastle 
in Northern Ireland with his 
friend Michael. They were there 
because Michael wanted to look 
for his wedding ring. It was lost 
in a field there. They spent an 
hour looking for the ring, but they 
found nothing. Later, they found 
something, but it wasn’t a ring. It 
was a gold coin. Then, they found 
another and another. They found 
eighty-four gold coins! Together, 
they’re worth around $110,000. 
One coin was very valuable. It’s 
worth around $6,000. The coins 
are now in a museum in Ulster. 
Paul and Michael never found 
Michael’s ring. 
Lesson 5B
VOCABULARY
1A countable nouns: dollar, hour, 
jumper, meal, song
uncountable nouns: fashion, food, 
money, music, time
1B 1  money (much + uncountable 
noun)
2 work (hour and job need an 
article before them)
3 social media (on social media but 
on the news, in a post)
4 apartment ( a + countable 
singular noun)
5 jumper (a + countable singular 
noun)
6 time (enough + uncountable 
noun or plural singular noun)
1C 1  b (a lot of + uncountable or 
plural countable noun)
2 a (We can’t use luggage a ft er a 
number.)
3 a (a + countable noun)
4 b (no + uncountable or plural 
countable noun)
5 b (a great + countable noun)
6 a (some + uncountable or plural 
countable noun)
7 b (article needs an article before 
it)
8 a (News doesn’t need an article 
before it as it’s speaking about 
news generally.)
9 a (a few + countable plural noun)
10 b (a bit of + uncountable noun)
GRAMMAR
2A 1  b (Aren’t comes before a plural 
countable noun; c isn’t possible 
with much.)
2 a (The meaning of b doesn’t fi t; 
we can’t use many before an 
uncountable noun.)
3 c (Many comes before a 
countable noun; we don’t use 
any in a positive sentence.)
4 b (too + adjective; enough /too 
much + uncountable noun)
5 c (a piece of + singular countable 
noun, not plural noun)
6 c (Too much isn’t possible before 
a plural countable noun; too 
many doesn’t fi t the meaning.)
7 b (we need to use of aft er a bit 
and a lot.)
8 c (We can use any to say that 
something does not exist.)
2B 1 A lot (a lot of + countable noun)
2 Some (some + plural countable 
noun: ‘not everyone … some …’)
3 no (‘boring when … no …’)
4 too much (too much + 
uncountable noun)
5 some (some + plural countable 
noun)
6 any (negative verb + any )
PRONUNCIATION
3  1 We don’t have a lot of time.
2 I always put a little milk in my tea.
3 Let’s go and have some fun!
4 I need a bit of help. 
5 There are lots of people here.  
87

--- PAGE 86 ---

ANSWER KEY
4 b (Only soft is something you 
can touch.)
5 a (Thick is the opposite of thin. )
6 b (A street is narrow or wide. )
1B 1 wet  
2 full  
3 weak  
4 light  
5 narrow 
6 warm  
7 light  
8 thin
HOW TO ...
2A a
2B 1 us
2 here’s
3 got 
4 all
5 thing
6 going
2C 1 need 
2 enough
3 diff erent
4 normal
5 why
6 can
7 Think
8 comes
PRONUNCIATION
3   We all need to look a ft er our 
things // but what about when 
we go to the beach // for a swim 
in the sea? // It’s not always safe 
enough to leave your wallet on the 
beach when you go into the water. 
// So here’s a solution // if you’re 
looking for something di ff erent! 
// It’s the Safe and Dry Wallet. // 
It’s not just a normal wallet // and 
I’ll tell you why. // You can put it in 
water // and everything inside // 
cards, cash and even photos // all 
stay completely dry. // Think about 
it. // You can enjoy going to the 
beach // without worrying about 
your stuff ! // The wallet costs 
just £19.99 // and it comes in six 
diff erent colours. 
SPEAKING
4A 1 problem 
2 answer
3 got
4 best
5 Another
6 know
7 comes
8 perfect
Lesson 5D
GRAMMAR
1A 1  b (show us her photos or show 
her photos to us)
2 c (lend someone something)
3 a (buy a car)
4 c (left you a note)
1B 1 d 2 a 3 e 4 b 5 c
1C 1  I off ered my spare concert ticket 
to Simon
2 Did he ask you for it?
3 I sent him a message
4 Shall I give him a call?
5 you want to give the ticket to 
someone else
6 Tell me a joke
7 I’ll buy a joke book for everyone 
in your family
LISTENING
2A 1 a bike 2 an app
2B 1 shop
2 friends
3 neighbours
4 local
5 barbecue
6 guitar
2C 1 far
2 need
3 know
4 live on the ground floor
5 weekend trip
UNIT 6
Lesson 6A
VOCABULARY
1  1 snooker
2 ice-skating
3 athletics
4 baseball/hockey/cricket
5 bowling
6 rugby
7 scuba diving
8 volleyball
2A 1 b (go + sport ending in ing )
2 c (play + ball sport)
3 a (do + other sports)
4 c (play + ball sport)
5 a (do + other sports)
6 b (go + sport ending in ing )
2B 1  playing cricket (play + ball sport)
2 doing karate (do + others sport)
3 going running ( go + sport 
ending in ing)
4 going windsur fing (go + sport 
ending in ing)
5 going skiing ( go + sport ending 
in ing)
6 going bowling ( go + sport 
ending in ing)
7 doing exercise (do + others sport)
GRAMMAR
3A 1  b (An adverb of frequency 
comes before the main verb.)
2 c (An adverb of frequency 
comes aft er the verb be.)
3 b (An adverb of manner comes 
aft er a verb and an object.)
4 a (An adjective follows look .)
3B 1  I normally go cycling at the 
weekends. 
2 … I don’t run very o ft en.
3 When I go running, I run very 
slowly.
4 I’m oft en in the pool at the 
sports centre.
5 I enjoy it, but I don’t swim 
brilliantly.
6 I play badminton badly.
7 I never do sport.
8 … I quite oft en fall asleep 
before 9 p.m.
9 I always ride my bike to work. 
10 … I have to cycle quite hard.
11 … I go to the sailing club early in 
the mornings. 
12 … I can sail it quite well.
PRONUNCIATION
4  1 I can run quite fast. 
2 I don’t do it very well.  
3 We go there quite oft en. 
4 She does it really brilliantly. 
5 We need to move it carefully. 
READING
5  A (The picture shows the sports of 
cricket, baseball and hockey.)
6A should (‘I think anyone interested 
in exercise should give the 
fourteen free days a try’)
6B 2  (‘I think this is important 
because it stops people from 
wasting money’)
3 (‘FITNESS@pp has a lot to offer 
and the cost seems good to me’)
4 (‘you can feel part of a real class 
when you’re actually at home’)
5 (‘busy people like me can 
exercise at any time of the day’)
8 (‘This app probably isn’t for 
people who just want easy 
exercise’)
6C 1 F (‘it’s free for fourteen days’)
2 F (‘There are also hundreds of 
video lessons to choose from’)
3 T (‘There are many di ff erent 
types of classes … from yoga to 
t’ai chi to to using an exercise 
bike’)
4 T (‘from ten-minute lessons to 
sixty-minute ones’)
5 F (‘This helps you to fi nd the 
right classes easily’)
6 T (‘I can’t play my own music on 
my phone and use the app at 
the same time’)
Lesson 6B
VOCABULARY
1  1 e 2 b 3 d 4 a 5 c 6 f
2A 1 c (pull something open)
2 a (You don’t point at or kick 
something to get information.)
3 b (Only bite comes before finger.)
4 a (get something from a place)
5 c (Only point is followed by at.)
6 a (Only climb fi ts with ladder.)
2B 1 climb
2 jump
3 kick
4 push
5 fall
6 Click
GRAMMAR
3A 1  a (Only still comes before a 
negative verb.)
2 b (Only just comes before a 
positive verb.)
3 c (Only yet comes at the end of a 
question.)
88

--- PAGE 87 ---

ANSWER KEY
4 c (Only recently comes at the 
end of a sentence with a positive 
verb.)
5 a (Only yet comes at the end of a 
sentence with a negative verb.)
6 b (Only already comes between 
a positive auxiliary verb and a 
main verb.)
3B 1  already got (He did it over a 
month ago.)
2 just packed (He fi nished it fi ve 
minutes ago.)
3 recently booked a company (He 
did it a week ago.)
4 just given his new address (He 
did it yesterday.)
5 still hasn’t spoken to (He called 
twice, but they didn’t answer.)
6 recently told (He did this nine 
days ago.)
7 hasn’t packed the things in 
the house yet. (There’s no 
information about doing this.)
8 still hasn’t paid (He emailed and 
is waiting for a reply.) 
PRONUNCIATION
4A 1  Have you finished with your 
glass? 
2 We haven’t seen this fi lm yet. 
3 Has she had breakfast? Yes, she 
has. 
4 He hasn’t fi nished work yet. 
5 Has Benji had an argument with 
Gio? 
6 Have we moved yet? No, we 
haven’t. 
LISTENING
5A 1  d (‘it started when I didn’t hear 
my alarm’)
2 c (‘I left my phone at home’)
3 f (‘I missed one bus’)
4 e (‘I dropped my bag and 
everything fell out’)
5 b (‘I walked into a man on a bike’)
6 a (‘I had fourteen messages 
from my manager … Each new 
message was angrier …’)
5B 1 8/eight
2 teeth
3 8.10
4 7/seven
5 funny
6 fine
7 taxi
8 2/two
9 1.30
10 14/fourteen
5C 1  stressed (He didn’t hear his 
alarm, so he woke up late.)
2 angry (He had to wait seven 
minutes for the next one.)
3 worried (He had to wait on his 
own for an hour before he saw a 
doctor.)
4 pleased (He was worried it 
was broken and happy when it 
wasn’t.)
5 unhappy (His manager le ft 
fourteen messages that were 
getting angrier and angrier.)
5D 1 I’ve had the worst day today.
2 Did you get there on time?
3 What time did you get to work?
4 I got there at half past one.
WRITING
6A a (‘I’ve fi nally got a car!’)
c (‘I’ve … fi nished my exams’)
d (‘I’ve got a summer job in a 
restaurant’)
6B 1 things
2 hope
3 recently
4 just
5 big
6 all
7 for me
8 best
7C Sample answer
Hi Maya,
Thanks for your email. It was great 
to hear all your news. Well done 
on getting a car and a job!
Not a lot has happened here 
recently. I’ve been really busy with 
work. The big thing is that I have 
a new hobby. I’ve  joined an art 
class. It’s for people who are new 
to art like me. It’s a lot of fun. I’ve 
made a new friend, too. She’s the 
same age as me and she lives in 
the same town. We went for co ff ee 
aft er the class and chatted for two 
hours. We’re meeting for co ff ee 
again next week. 
Say hello to Ben and Dennis for 
me. I miss them!
Talk soon,
Drew
Lesson 6C
VOCABULARY
1 1 emergency
2 medical
3 symptoms
4 surgery
5 treatment
6 results
7 prescription
8 virus
2A 1  b (A person’s tongue is in their 
mouth.)
2 a (A stiff neck stops you moving 
your head.)
3 c (We wear a watch on our wrist.)
4 b (A finger is on a person’s hand.)
5 b (We wear a bag on our 
shoulder.)
6 a (A painful ankle stops us 
walking.)
2B 1 toothache
2 painful elbow
3 headache
4 sore throat
5 backache
6 temperature
HOW TO ...
3A virus
3B 1 How can I help you?
2 I’ve got a sore throat and I can’t 
stop coughing.
3 I feel really tired and dizzy, and 
my body aches.
4 I’ve got a temperature, too. 
5 When did these symptoms start?
6 It sounds like you’ve got a virus.
7 You should stay home.
8 You mustn’t take more than 
eight tablets every twenty-four 
hours.
PRONUNCIATION
4  1, 3, 4 (There is a -t or -d sound 
before a vowel sound.)
SPEAKING
5A 1 worried
2 painful
3 put
4 taken
5 should
Lesson 6D
GRAMMAR
1A 1 c (adjective + to infinitive)
2 c (adjective + to infinitive)
3 b (for + someone + to infinitive)
4 b (adjective + not to + in finitive)
1B 1 not to work
2 of you to call
3 not to get
4 to see
5 of you to help
6 safer to drive
READING
2A 1  brother (‘The brother and sister 
are … two of the youngest 
people to have flown solo around 
the world’)
2 August (‘She le ft Belgium in 
August 2021’)
3 60/sixty (‘Her trip involved sixty 
stops’)
4 January (‘and returned in 
January 2022’)
5 March (‘…, Mack, left So fia in 
Bulgaria in March 2022’)
6 August (‘and landed in the same 
place in August’)
7 52/fift y-two (‘He travelled 
across fift y-two countries and 
two oceans’)
2B 1  M (‘The brother and sister are 
Belgian … Zara’s seventeen-
year-old brother, Mack, left 
Sofia in Bulgaria’)
2 Z (‘she was the most worried 
about flying across some of the 
coldest parts of the world’)
3 Z (‘took two months longer than 
she wanted because of stormy 
weather’)
4 M (‘he slept on an island where 
nobody lives in the Paci fic’)
5 Z (‘She slept in an airport in 
Indonesia for two days’)
6 M (‘Mack spoke to his parents 
each day’)
7 M (‘He enjoyed fl ying over 
national parks in Kenya’)
8 Z (‘four planes from the Belgian 
air force were there to meet her’)
89

--- PAGE 88 ---

ANSWER KEY
REVIEW 5–6
GRAMMAR
1A 1 yours
2 we
3 hers
4 he
5 theirs
1B 1  Whose (question about 
possession)
2 its (= the toy)
3 him (= my brother)
4 then (= at 6 p.m.)
5 that (= falling over in class)
6 mine (= my glass)
2  1  any (We use any with a 
question.)
2 too much (We don’t use 
much with a positive verb; too 
many can’t come before an 
uncountable noun.)
3 a bit of (Time is uncountable so 
many isn’t possible; too much 
doesn’t fi t the meaning.)
4 enough (Computers is a singular 
plural noun so a bit of and much 
aren’t possible.)
5 some (We don’t usually use 
any in a positive statement or 
enough aft er I’d love.)
6 a lot of (Money is uncountable 
so many isn’t possible; some isn’t 
possible in a negative sentence.)
7 some (We use some in requests 
or off ers.)
8 too (We use too before an 
adjective.)
3  1  Can you show me your new 
boots? 
2 I’ve lent Sofia some money. 
3 We’ve got a leaving card for 
Zack.
4 I’ve passed your email address 
to Maggie. 
5 Naomi asked me an interesting 
question.
6 I sent a short email to all our 
customers. 
7 Did you tell the woman your 
name? 
8 Shall I buy some flowers for 
your mum?  
4  1  You don’t have to run fast 
around a field. (adverb of 
manner comes aft er the verb)
2 I normally go to the gym with 
a friend twice a week. (adverb 
of frequency comes before the 
main verb)
3 Try to eat healthily. (adverb of 
manner comes aft er the verb)
4 It oft en went badly. (adverb of 
manner comes aft er the verb)
5 I was often late for meetings 
and appointments. (adverb of 
frequency comes a ft er the verb 
be)
6 I don’t always have time to do 
this. (adverb of frequency comes 
aft er a negative auxiliary verb)
5  1  Have you booked the meeting 
room for tomorrow yet?
2 I’ve just sent them all an 
invitation.
3 Ed has already replied.
4 he hasn’t had any holidays this 
year yet.
5 He’s already paid for a fl ight and 
hotel. 
6 he still hasn’t fi nished last 
month’s report. 
6  1  It’s hard to understand Max 
sometimes.
2 It was really nice of you to drive 
me home. 
3 It is exciting to think of living in 
another country. 
4 It was wrong of me to get angry 
– I’m sorry. 
5 It’s better to get up early than 
to go to bed late. 
6 Be careful not to leave the oven 
on – you don’t want to start a fire. 
VOCABULARY
7  1 valuable
2 on
3 rent
4 fair
5 off ers
6 increased
7 cost
8 savings
8  1 apartment
2 suggestion
3 battery
4 jumper
5 meal
6 chair
7 suitcase
8 post
9 lorry
10 word
9  1 narrow
2 empty
3 bright
4 plastic
5 soft
6 wet
 10  1 p layed cricket
2 went skiing
3 did yoga
4 played table tennis
5 did athletics
6 went sailing
 11  1 c limbed
2 fell off
3 crashed
4 get
5 pulled
6 argument
7 forgot
8 took
9 dropped
10 bit
 12  1 p rescription
2 sore
3 dizzy
4 painful
5 ache
6 results
UNIT 7
Lesson 7A
VOCABULARY
1A 1 c (watch a programme)
2 b (go on a tour)
3 b (have an evening out)
4 b (go to the market)
5 a (see a band)
6 c (go out with friends)
1B 1 a night in (have a night in)
2 a meal out (have a meal out)
3 a film (see a film)
4 some live music (see some live 
music)
5 a basketball game ( watch a 
basketball game)
6 some friends round ( have some 
friends round )
7 to the theatre ( go to the theatre)
8 for coff ee (go for a coffee)
PRONUNCIATION
2  1 /j/ 2 /r/ 3 /w/ 4 /w/ 5 /j/
GRAMMAR
3A 1 c (present continuous for future  
 a rrangement)
2 c (be going to for a future 
intention)
3 b (will for a decision made at the 
moment of speaking)
4 c (future time phrase – in a/an 
…’s time)
3B 1  going to meet/meeting (future 
intention or arrangement)
2 ’ll get (decision made at the time 
of speaking)
3 Shall I (off er)
4 ’re going to see/’re seeing 
(future intention or 
arrangement)
5 in (before a time period when 
talking about the future)
3C 1  ’m having (present continuous 
for future arrangement)
2 ’m going (present continuous 
for future arrangement)
3 are you going (present 
continuous for future 
arrangement)
4 ’re having (present continuous 
for future arrangement)
5 ’re going (present continuous 
for future arrangement)
6 ’ll come (decision made at the 
time of speaking)
7 ’re meeting (present continuous 
for future arrangement)
8 Shall I get (off er)
9 ’ll get (decision made at the time 
of speaking)
10 ’ll see (decision made at the 
time of speaking)
LISTENING
4A 1  b (Option a isn’t possible 
because Jake has already said 
he can’t remember the name of 
the restaurant.)
2 a (Option b changes the subject. 
Option a continues the subject 
of the music.)
3 a (Option b changes the 
focus to a diff erent shopping 
centre. Option a continues the 
subject of getting to the Grand 
Shopping Centre.)
90

--- PAGE 89 ---

ANSWER KEY
4 b (‘it works for me because I love 
working outdoors and being 
on my bike for a few days each 
week. I get to do my hobby while 
working’)
5C 1  Friday (‘Between Friday and 
Sunday evening, I cycle up to 
150 km’)
2 150 (‘I cycle up to 150 km’)
3 soup (‘When you’re carrying 
soup or hot coff ee…’)
4 routes (‘It’s also good to know 
the area, because then you know 
all the shorter routes to take and 
that saves you time’)
5 busy (‘That’s why I work at the 
weekends. It’s always busy’)
6 app (‘I just use the company’s 
app on my phone to see what 
orders I have to deliver’)
7 customers (‘I chat to restaurant 
workers and customers’)
8 sun (‘I can enjoy the sun on my 
face’)
Lesson 7C
VOCABULARY
1A 1  a (Only option a makes sense in 
the sentence.)
2 c (Option a isn’t possible 
because there’s no against a ft er 
lean. Option b doesn’t make 
sense in the sentence.)
3 b (Only option b make sense in 
the sentence.)
4 c (Only option c fi ts the meaning 
and is followed by a pronoun i.e. 
you.)
5 a (Only option a fi ts. Options b 
and c don’t come before on. )
6 a (Only option a fi ts the 
meaning of the sentence.)
1B 1 mustn’t touch
2 can’t wait
3 don’t let you
4 shouldn’t lean
5 can’t take o ff
HOW TO ...
2A 1  c (‘You can take photos 
anywhere in the museum’)
2 a (‘Is it all right if we discuss our 
project in here?’)
3 d (‘We’re still having our 
meeting in here’)
4 b (‘while you’re staying with us’)
2B 1  not fine (‘You can take photos 
anywhere in the museum except 
in this room’)
2 not OK (‘I’m afraid that’s not 
possible. Someone is using it’)
3 not fine (‘May I come in?’ / I’m 
afraid not’)
4 most (‘You can help yourself 
food in the fridge … You 
mustn’t eat Jack’s yoghurts’)
4 b (Option b answers Jimi’s 
question. Option a doesn’t.)
4B 1  niece’s (‘It’s my niece’s 6th 
birthday’)
2 food (‘I’m going for the cake!’)
3 friends (I’m going out with 
colleagues from work’)
4 hasn’t (‘I’ve always wanted to 
see it’)
5 dresses (‘we need dresses to 
wear fast!’)
6 sixty (‘It’s about an hour away’)
7 cold (‘I think it’s just a cold’)
8 TV programme (‘That big new 
crime series is starting today’)
4C 1  I’m going out with colleagues 
from work.
2 I’m going shopping with my 
sister.
3 She’s not feeling very well.
4 I’m going to make her some 
soup.
WRITING
5A 1 are you getting
2 ’re going
3 ’re visiting
4 ’re seeing
5B 1  F (She asks, ‘How are you 
getting from the airport … ?’)
2 T (‘I’ve made a few plans for us 
for Tuesday and Wednesday’)
3 F (They are visiting the market. 
There is no mention of tickets.)
4 F (‘the market in the old part of 
the town’)
5 T (‘We’re going to see a comedy 
show … It’s with local actors’)
6 T (‘I know you’ve made some 
arrangements for Thursday and 
Friday. Am I included? I hope 
so.’)
6A 1 I’m taking a taxi to Liv’s house.
2 We’re renting bikes to go to 
Epson Forest on Thursday 
morning.
3 We’re having a meal out on 
Thursday evening.
4 I’m going shopping on Friday.
6C Sample answer
Hi Liv,
I can’t wait to see you! I’m arriving 
at 14.15. I’ve booked a taxi to take 
me to your house so you don’t 
need to meet me at the airport. 
The arrangements for Tuesday 
and Wednesday are perfect. Thank 
you!
My arrangements for Thursday 
are for both of us. On Thursday 
morning, we’re renting bikes so 
we can go to Epson Forest. In 
the evening, we’re going to a new 
seafood restaurant in the city. On 
Friday, I’m going shopping. I need 
to buy a gift for my mum for her 
birthday. Do you want to come 
with me? I’d love you to!
See you soon!
Lesson 7B
VOCABULARY
1  1 takeaway
2 used
3 order
4 pick up
5 deliver
6 tip
7 delivery
8 containers
2A 1 a (a jar of jam)
2 c (a bowl of cereal)
3 a (a tube of toothpaste)
4 b (a box of chocolates)
5 c (a mug of tea)
6 a (a packet of crisps)
2B 1 crisps
2 butter
3 soup
4 sandwiches
5 cake
GRAMMAR
3A 1  b (all the people have arrived = 
everyone)
2 a (no place = nowhere)
3 c (a thing that wasn’t pasta = 
something)
4 c (It’s a question, so we use any. )
5 b (It’s a negative sentence, so 
we use any.)
6 b (to infinitive follows an 
indefinite pronoun)
3B 1 nothing
2 something
3 anything
4 someone
5 anywhere
6 someone
7 no one
8 anyone 
9 Everywhere
10 nothing
PRONUNCIATION
4A 1 anything nice
2 nowhere comfortable
3 anything interesting
4 something fun
5 no one strong
4B 1 stressed 2 stressed
READING
5A c (The article describes the good 
things and the problems of being a 
delivery rider.)
5B 1  c (‘So, it’s about good cycling 
and safety skills, not speed’)
2 a (‘The delivery company 
pays me for every order I take 
from a restaurant or café to a 
customer. It doesn’t pay me for 
every hour I work’)
3 c (‘I can just enjoy the sun on my 
face and the fresh air’)
91

--- PAGE 90 ---

ANSWER KEY
6 b (‘My parents and sister come 
and visit me once a year. I go 
and visit them once a year’)
2C 1 I saw it in a travel magazine. 
2 They were looking for another 
tour guide. 
3 We’re not rich but we love our 
jobs! 
4 I go and visit them once a year. 
UNIT 8
Lesson 8A
VOCABULARY
1A become more or better: become 
fitter, get faster, improve, increase
become less or worse: become 
cheaper, get smaller, go down
no change: stay the same
1B 1 b (Up only follows b, not a or c.)
2 c (Of follows c, but not a or b.)
3 c (A person cannot increase or 
go up.)
4 b (Options a and c do not fi t the 
sentence meaning.)
5 b (Only b fits the sentence 
meaning.)
6 a (only a fits the meaning; 
technology can’t increase or go 
up.)
1C 1 getting better
2 becoming smaller
3 speed of change
4 improving
5 going down
6 staying the same
7 increasing
GRAMMAR
2A 1 b (will + infinitive)
2 a (will + infinitive)
3 a (don’t think + subject + will + 
infinitive)
4 c (Probably comes between will 
and the infinitive in a positive 
sentence and before won’t in a 
negative sentence.)
2B 1 Perhaps we’ll all have
2 We’ll wear
3 Will we want
4 ’ll spend
5 will last
6 don’t think we’ll have to worry
7 will last 
PRONUNCIATION
3  1 will
2 ’ll
3 will
4 won’t
5 won’t
6 ’ll
READING
4A 1  (They both talk about the 
future use of social robots in 
business, healthcare, education 
and for friendship, but they give 
diff erent examples.)
2C 1  Excuse me, is it OK if I take a 
photo in here?
2 I’m a
 sorry, you can’t. 
3 Is it all right if we discuss our 
project in here?
4 Sure, no problem, but you 
shouldn’t to
 talk loudly. 
5 Well, can we to use that room 
over there instead?
6 I’m afraid that’s not possible.
7 May I to come in? 
8 I’m afraid not. 
9 You can to help yourself to food 
in the fridge while you’re staying 
with us. 
10 You do mustn’t eat Jack’s 
yoghurts. 
PRONUNCIATION
3  1 P 2 N 3 P 4 P 5 P 6 N
SPEAKING
4A 1 OK
2 afraid
3 may
4 can’t
5 can
6 think
7 problem
8 shouldn’t
Lesson 7D
GRAMMAR
1A 1 b (in front of )
2 a (on the right-hand side)
3 c (in the distance)
4 a (stand in a place)
5 c (in the middle of a picture)
6 a (with grey hair)
1B 1 with (the man with glasses)
2 front (in front of )
3 with (the woman with a camera)
4 without ( people without glasses )
5 with (friends with a smile)
1C 1  Meera and Yu are in the middle 
of the photo.
2 Yu is in front of Meera.
3 Andre is on the left of the photo.
4 Luca is on the right-hand side of 
the photo.
5 Meera is at the back of the 
group of friends.
6 In the background, there is a 
building. 
LISTENING
2A b (‘And you’re still in Iceland 
twenty years later’)
2B 1  b (‘But what was special were 
the amazing green and purple 
lights in the sky’)
2 c (‘I saw it in a travel magazine’)
3 a (‘I had to work and save for 
five years fi rst’)
4 c (‘once I arrived in Iceland, I was 
just really relaxed and happy’)
5 b (‘I … got talking to one of the 
staff at the tour company. They 
were looking for another tour 
guide’)
4B Mentioned in article A: 
at events (‘When you go to an 
event … a social robot might 
welcome you’)
in shops (‘When you go to … a 
shop or a shopping centre, a social 
robot might welcome you’)
with older people (‘Social robots 
could play a big part in the lives 
of some people, particularly older 
people’)
Mentioned in article B:
at offi ce receptions (‘When you 
enter an offi ce building … You 
might see a social robot’)
in museums (‘They can also work 
in museums’)
Mentioned in both articles: in 
hospitals (‘Social robots can 
help busy hospital doctors and 
nurses / Social robots could talk 
to patients during their stay in 
hospital’); with children (‘social 
robots are working with children 
who have learning di ffi culties / 
Social robots can … work with 
children around the world’)
4C 1  room (Article B: ‘It might even 
show you to the room you need’)
2 welcome (Article A: ‘When you 
go to … a shop or a shopping 
centre, a social robot might 
welcome you’)
3 medical history (Article A: ‘For 
example, the robots can find 
out about a patient’s medical 
history’)
4 calm (Article B:  Social robots 
could talk to patients … to help 
the patients stay calm’)
5 worried (Article A: ‘They can 
chat to the patients to help 
them feel less worried’)
6 talk to (Article A: ‘The robots 
teach the children how to talk 
to other people’)
7 studies (Article B: ‘They can be 
a tutor for children who need 
extra help with their studies’)
8 museums (Article B: ‘They can 
also work in museums, teaching 
visitors … about the things 
there’)
9 lonely (Article A: ‘particularly 
older people who live alone and 
feel lonely’)
10 best friend (Article B: ‘twenty 
percent of them said they think 
they’ll have a robot best friend 
in the future’) 
Lesson 8B
VOCABULARY
1  1 + (hope / good day = positive)
2 + (have a dream = positive)
3 − (fail = negative)
92

--- PAGE 91 ---

ANSWER KEY
4 + (have work experience = 
positive)
5 − (worry = negative)
6 + (bright side = positive)
7 − (impossible = negative)
8 − (the negative side = negative)
2A 1  c (Only worry comes before 
about.)
2 c (Only dream fi ts the sentence 
meaning.)
3 a (Experience goes with work. )
4 c (Only impossible fi ts the 
sentence meaning.)
5 b (The phrase is look on the 
bright side.)
6 a (Only hope fi ts the sentence 
meaning.)
2B 1 dream (had a dream)
2 impossible (be almost impossible 
to)
3 failed (The business failed a ft er 
bad decisions.)
4 negative side (see the negative 
side)
5 bright side (look on the bright 
side)
6 experience ( have experience)
7 worry (worry about )
8 hope (hope that something will 
happen)
GRAMMAR
3A 1  c (if + present simple, will + 
infinitive)
2 a (will + infinitive + if + present 
simple but not with third-person 
-s)
3 c (will + infinitive + if + present 
simple)
4 c (If + don’t/doesn’t + main verb, 
will + infinitive)
3B 1 look (if + present simple)
2 ’ll see (will + infinitive)
3 talk (if + present simple)
4 ’ll help (will + infinitive)
5 ’ll be (will + infinitive)
6 share (if + present simple)
7 won’t need (won’t + infinitive)
8 move (if + present simple)
9 ’ll feel (will + infinitive)
10 change (if + present simple)
11 feel (if + present simple)
12 ’ll sleep (will + infinitive)
13 sleep (if + present simple)
14 ’ll have (will + infinitive)
PRONUNCIATION
4A–B
2 If f͜ it’s wet
3 if f f͜ it’s͜expensive
4 if f f͜ I can
5 If f͜ I’m free
6 If ͜ it’s hot
LISTENING
5A c (‘So, with me today is Dr Philip 
Warner to talk about these two 
diff erent ways of seeing life’)
5B 1  a (‘I’m an optimist. I’m always 
positive’)
2 b (‘My friend is a pessimist. She’s 
oft en negative’)
6A c (‘We’re not one thing. We can be 
both things’)
6B 1  O (‘Optimists are o ft en more 
relaxed’)
2 B (‘Optimists also feel 
motivated to do activities … 
Pessimists are motivated, too’)
3 P (‘pessimists worry things will 
go wrong. So, they’re more 
careful’)
4 O (‘optimists think nothing 
bad will happen … they put 
themselves in a dangerous 
situation’)
5 P (‘a pessimist expects things to 
go wrong’)
6 O (‘Optimists don’t expect 
anything to go wrong, but when 
it does, they’re shocked’)
6C 1  b (‘They really want to do 
activities’)
2 a (‘they stop if they think they’ll 
be in a dangerous situation’)
3 b (‘They can’t believe it!’)
WRITING
7A B (It’s talking about Bluebell’s 
dream job.)
7B 1 e 2 b 3 d 4 c 5 a
8A Students’ own answers
8B Dear Kenny,
It can be hard when people don’t 
understand how hard you work. 
If you don’t talk to anyone about 
it, no one will know how you feel. 
If you stop working so hard, your 
manager will notice.  
Can you talk to your manager 
about this? If you do that, they’ll 
understand your problem better. 
You can explain that you have 
always worked hard, but other 
people are getting more money 
or higher positions. Your manager 
might give you a reason for why 
you are not in a higher position 
yet. Or, they might tell you that 
you will get a higher position soon. 
Lesson 8C
VOCABULARY
1A 1  a (A vegetarian doesn’t eat 
meat.)
2 c (throw away)
3 a (Only energy has a price.)
4 b (Options b and c fi t the 
meaning, but there’s no away 
aft er throw so c isn’t possible.)
5 a (We can only turn down heating.)
6 c (We can only use throw away 
with rubbish.)
1B 1 pollution 
2 throw them away 
3 recycling
4 rubbish
5 heating
6 energy
7 vegetarians
8 environment
HOW TO ...
2A 1  vegetarian (‘You’re a vegetarian, 
aren’t you? / I am’)
2 vegetarian (‘You’re not a 
vegetarian, are you? / Actually, I 
am’)
3 meat (‘So, how about having 
meat two or three times a week 
for two months’)
4 day (‘you won’t have meat every 
day’)
2B 1 aren’t 
2 are 
3 isn’t 
4 are 
5 don’t 
6 will 
PRONUNCIATION
3  1 N (intonation rose at the end)
2 S (intonation fell at the end)
3 S (intonation fell at the end)
4 N (intonation rose at the end)
5 S (intonation fell at the end)
6 N (intonation rose at the end)
SPEAKING
4A 1 don’t we (need → don’t we?)
2 aren’t they (are going up → 
aren’t they?)
3 won’t it (’ll help → won’t it?)
4 did you (didn’t need → did you?)
5 don’t they (talk about → don’t 
they?)
6 can’t you (can → can’t you?)
7 won’t it (it’ll be → won’t it? )
Lesson 8D
GRAMMAR
1A 1 a 2 b 3 c 4 b 5 c 6 c
1B 1 sunny
2 wonderful
3 lucky
4 tasty
5 powerful
6 sleepy
7 sporty
8 rainy
READING
2A 2 (‘Firstly, technology will be 
important’)
3 (‘This means restaurants won’t 
need so many sta ff ’)
5 (‘it’s possible that restaurants 
will be smaller’)
6 (‘The menus might look a little 
diff erent’)
8 (‘Our changing weather will 
change the menus, too’)
93

--- PAGE 92 ---

ANSWER KEY
4  1  will life be (question = will + 
subject + infinitive)
2 will probably be (will + probably 
+ infinitive)
3 won’t have (won’t + infinitive)
4 won’t use (won’t + infinitive)
5 ’ll probably drive (will + probably 
+ infinitive)
6 everything will change ( will + 
infinitive)
7 ’m sure we’ll spend (’m sure … 
will + infinitive)
8 Will life in 2050 be (questions = 
Will + subject + in finitive)
9 Maybe we’ll work (Maybe … will 
+ infinitive)
10 will be (will + infinitive)
5  1 take, won’t (If + present simple,  
 will + infinitive)
2 will ask, needs ( will + infinitive + 
if + present simple)
3 Will you watch, have (Will + 
infinitive + if + present simple)
4 leave, ’ll get (if + present simple, 
will + infinitive)
5 don’t leave, ’ll (if + present 
simple, will + infinitive)
6 won’t, don’t study ( will not + 
infinitive + if + present simple)
7 snows, won’t ( if + present 
simple, will not + infinitive)
8 will sleep, misses (will + infinitive 
+ if + present simple)
6  1 y 3 y 5 ful 7 ful 
2 ful 4 ful 6 y, y 8 y, y 
VOCABULARY
7  1 go
2 have
3 see
4 go 
5 watch
8  1 takeaway
2 order
3 carton
4 bottle
5 pots
6 box
7 use
8 deliver
9 pick
10 tip
9  1 mustn’t (mustn’t touch)
2 allow (doesn’t allow)
3 can’t (can’t + infinitive)
4 let (don’t let me)
5 ’ve banned (have banned )
6 shouldn’t (shouldn’t lean)
 10  1 c (g etting smaller )
2 f (stays the same)
3 a (get faster and faster)
4 e (speed of delivery )
5 g (The price … is increasing)
6 h (your English improves )
7 d (The price … has gone down)
8 b (becoming warmer )
 11  1 b right ( look on the bright side)
2 hope (hope that)
3 impossible (be impossible to do 
something)
4 dream (My dream is to …)
5 fails (fail is the opposite of pass )
6 side (see the negative side)
2B 1  F (‘It’s hard to know exactly 
what a restaurant in 2050 will 
be like’)
2 T (‘Customers will arrive …
then use the phone to order … 
In some places, that’s already 
what happens’)
3 T (‘and the sta ff they have will 
need new skills’)
4 F (‘more people will prefer to 
eat takeaway food at home’)
5 T (‘we’ll all have the technology 
to tell us what our bodies need. 
We’ll then choose a meal to 
match that’)
6 F (‘Restaurants will probably sell 
more local food’)
7 F (‘a plant … that can create a 
delicious high-calorie meal. Not 
with its fruit, which you can’t 
eat, but with the rest of the 
plant’)
8 T (‘We might also see a lot more 
insect dishes on the menu’)
REVIEW 7–8
GRAMMAR
1  1  ’s having lunch (Freya = She + is 
+ ing)
2 ’s seeing the dentist ( She + is)
3 are going for coff ee (Freya and 
her mum = they + are + ing) 
4 ’s taking the train ( She + is + 
-ing)
5 ’s going shopping (She + is + 
-ing)
6 ’re having a meal out; ’re 
meeting (Freya and Jason = They 
+ are + ing)
7 ’s having breakfast ( She + is + 
-ing)
8 ’s taking the train ( She + is + 
-ing)
2  1 a (question about a person)
2 c (a singular verb follows 
everyone)
3 b (used to talk about no things)
4 c (to infinitive follows inde finite 
pronouns)
3  1  Why is there a car in the middle 
of the road?
2 My house is on the le ft -hand 
side of the street. 
3 There’s a strange animal in the 
distance.
4 Who’s that woman at the back 
of the photo?
5 Let’s sit at the back of the 
cinema.
6 Felicity’s the girl with the long 
red hair. 
7 I’m the only person in the 
picture without a hat. 
8 I’m waiting for you in front of a 
lovely old building. 
 12  1  environment 
2 pollution
3 rubbish
4 throw 
5 recycle
6 heating
7 energy
8 vegetarian
CUMULATIVE REVIEW 1–4
GRAMMAR
1  1 Do 
2 is
3 What
4 Which
5 How
6 many
2  1  ’m standing (action happening 
now)
2 ’m spending (action happening 
now)
3 ’m thinking (action happening 
now)
4 costs (state)
5 love (state)
6 ’m feeling (action happening 
now)
3  1  Sophie loves swim ming/to 
swim in the sea. 
2 I really hate waking up early.
3 Sonny dislikes play ing team 
sports. 
4 Most days, I don’t mind making 
dinner. 
5 I love beginning a new 
notebook.
6 We don’t enjoy / We enjoy not 
getting up early in the holidays.
4  1 All 
2 Most 
3 None 
4 Some 
5 Most 
6 Some 
5  1 have to wear (it’s necessary)
2 don’t have to leave (it’s not 
necessary)
3 can’t wear (it’s not OK)
4 don’t have to (it’s not necessary)
6  1  Have you ever ridden (past 
experience)
2 haven’t (negative short answer 
about a past experience)
3 rode (past fi nished action)
4 were (past fi nished state)
5 ’s gone (Hannah is at the 
supermarket now)
6 ’ve never been (past experience)
7 ’ve never seen (past experience)
8 ’ve watched (past experience)
9 Have you ever left (question 
about past experience)
10 have (positive short answer 
about a past experience)
11 haven’t (negative short answer 
about a past experience)
VOCABULARY
7  1 dry (dry your hair)
2 go (go to sleep)
3 do (do the washing up)
4 join ( join a gym)
5 lock (lock the door)
6 get (get dressed )
7 wait (wait for a bus)
8 put (put something away )
94

--- PAGE 93 ---

ANSWER KEY
8 ’ll enjoy (will + infinitive)
9 like (if + present simple)
10 will be (will + infinitive)
11 like (if + present simple)
12 ’ll probably love (will probably + 
infinitive)
VOCABULARY
7  1 valuable (describes the clock)
2 cost (an object costs something)
3 savings (spend savings)
4 spend (spend £20)
5 rent (rent a bike)
6 off ers (have offers)
8  1 baseball, hockey
2 sailing, t’ai chi 
3 skiing, volleyball
9  1 toe (A fi nger is on a hand.)
2 surgery (Doctors work at a 
hospital or a surgery.)
3 results (test results)
4 treatment (No treatment for the 
broken toe.)
5 prescription (A prescription for 
medicine.)
6 painkillers (medicine to stop 
pain)
7 shoulder (Ankle is very unlikely!)
8 neck (stiff neck)
 10  1 h ave ( have a night in)
2 watch (watch a basketball game/
TV )
3 went (go out with friends)
4 seen (see a play)
5 watch (watch a race/TV )
6 go (go for coffee)
 11  1 h ope
2 dream
3 impossible
4 failed
5 bright
6 negative
7 experience
8 worry
 12  1  environment
2 recycle
3 rubbish
4 pollution
5 vegetarian
HOW TO ...
 13  1 a ll 
2 answer 
3 got 
4 Another 
5 best 
6 important 
7 really 
8 yours
 14  1  Is it all right for us to use this 
table?
2 Could I borrow your phone for a 
minute?
3 Please feel free to help yourself 
to food.
4 I’m afraid that’s not possible.
5 Do you think I could use your 
toilet? 
6 You mustn’t talk loudly in here. 
CUMULATIVE REVIEW 1–8
GRAMMAR
1  1  was standing, ran (The fi rst 
action was in progress when the 
second action happened.) 
2 They come
 occasionally 
occasionally come to stay with 
us. (Adverbs of frequency come 
before main verbs.)
3 Never, Liam and I never see 
each other these days. (Adverbs 
of frequency come before main 
verbs.)
4 We normally go out normally
 
for a walk in the mornings. 
(Adverbs of frequency come 
before main verbs.)
5 Why are you running so fastly  
fast? (Fast is an irregular adverb 
of manner.)
6 I think I can cook better good  
than you. (This sentence needs a 
comparative adverb.)
7 You sing really good well. (Well 
is the adverb of manner; good is 
an adjective.)
8 Something smells strangely  
strange in here. (We use 
adjectives a ft er sense verbs, like 
smell or taste.) 
3  1  Have you got Mum a birthday 
present yet?
2 still haven’t got
3 ’ve already decided
4 haven’t had time to look for any 
tickets yet.
5 ’ve just had
4  1  ’m meeting (future 
arrangement)
2 ’re going/’re going to go (future 
arrangement/intention)
3 ’re going to take/’re taking 
(future arrangement/intention)
4 ’re going to eat (future 
intention)
5 ’s going/’s going to go (future 
arrangement/intention)
6 ’ll walk (decision made at the 
time of speaking)
7 ’re seeing (future arrangement)
8 is coming/is going to come 
(future arrangement/intention)
5  1  Is Mariana the girl with long 
dark hair?
2 Use the glass on the right-hand 
side of you.
3 I thought I saw a plane in the 
distance, but it was just a bird!
4 Eric loves lying in the middle of 
his garden with a book.
5 We usually park our car in front 
of our house. 
6 I usually sit in the chair at the 
back of the class.  
6  1 have (if + present simple)
2 don’t have (if + present simple)
3 will increase (will + infinitive)
4 ’ll learn (will + infinitive)
5 decide (if + present simple)
6 ’ll have (will + infinitive)
7 love (if + present simple)
8  1 feathers
2 wings
3 insect
4 wings
5 skin
6 fox
7 fur
8 tail
9  1 carry (carry your suitcase)
2 answer (answer the phone)
3 bring (bring someone a coffee)
4 cancel (cancel a meeting)
5 hold (hold the door open)
6 take (take a break)
7 make (make time for something)
 10  1 m edicine
2 discover
3 tourism
4 plan
5 expect
6 Politics
7 Drama
8 develop
 11  1  outside ( Out of needs an object 
aft er it.)
2 beside (Together doesn’t have an 
object aft er it.)
3 upside down (Up and down 
describes movement, not 
position.)
4 over (We go over a bridge.)
5 forwards (Move around doesn’t 
go with a few steps.)
6 out of (We can’t take something 
onto a bag.)
 12  1 t rip
2 way
3 border
4 coast
5 journey
6 distance
7 routes
8 travel
HOW TO ...
 13  1 r ight
2 understand
3 be
4 Shall
5 can
6 Let
7 help
8 First
9 Like
10 always
11 next
12 can/could
13 don’t
14 about
15 fine
CUMULATIVE REVIEW 5–8
GRAMMAR
1  1 no (No follows a positive verb.)
2 too many (Too many comes 
before a countable noun.)
3 a little (A little comes before an 
uncountable noun.)
4 too much (Much isn’t usual in a 
question with would you like ; we 
use any or some.)
5 many (We say a coffee to mean 
a cup of coffee; we use some but 
not many before an uncountable 
noun.)
6 too much (Too many/much come 
before a noun not an adjective.)
7 not enough (Not enough doesn’t 
fit the question.)
8 any (Any is for questions not 
statements.)
2  1  I always
 am am always in the 
offi ce on Fridays. (Adverbs of 
frequency come a ft er the verb 
be.)
95

--- PAGE 94 ---

ANSWER KEY
 14 1 Shall I make 
2 That would be
3 Let me help
4 kind of you
5 want me to carry
6 I’m OK.
7 ’m worried about my wrist
8 ’ve broken it
9 whole body aches
10 did these symptoms start
11 sounds like
12 should stay at home
VOCABULARY
1 1 industry 
2 job 
3 off ered 
4 personal assistant 
5 sign 
6 pay 
7 career 
8 developed
2 1 pleased
2 afraid
3 lonely
4 positive
5 stressed
6 confident
3 1 boarding pass
2 check-in desk
3 passport control
4 security
5 departure lounge
6 board
7 fl ight
8 delay
4 1 clever
2 popular
3 equal
4 real
5 delicious
5 1 bought 
2 ridden
3 read
4 won
5 taught
6 wrote
6 1 get 
2 prices 
3 presents 
4 special 
5 unusual 
6 receive 
7 countable nouns: bag, carrot, 
meal, message, minute, tip
uncountable nouns: electricity, 
fashion, furniture, luggage, music, 
work
8 1 thick, thin
2 dark, light
3 metal, plastic
4 narrow, wide
5 strong, weak
6 plastic, so ft
7 dark, empty
8 empty, full
9 1 push 
2 have 
3 take 
4 left 
5 get/take, down 
6 forget 
 10 1 c 2 f 3 a 4 e 5 b 6 d
 11 1 c 2 d 3 b 4 e 5 a
 12 1 get faster
2 become
3 improve
4 speed
5 down
6 the same
2 didn’t help, was cooking (The 
second action was in progress 
when the fi rst action failed to 
happen.) 
3 got up, was sleeping (The 
second action was in progress 
when the fi rst action happened.)  
4 didn’t do, was studying (The 
second action was in progress 
when the fi rst action failed to 
happen.) 
5 were learning, met (The fi rst 
action was in progress when the 
second action happened.) 
6 wasn’t looking, took (The fi rst 
action was in progress when the 
second action happened.) 
2 1 – (no article before dates)
2 The (It’s the second time the 
advertisement mentions the 
table.)
3 the (in the evening = set phrase)
4 The (It’s the second time the 
bike is mentioned.)
5 – (no article before a town or 
city)
6 – (no article before a station 
name)
3 1  didn’t have to (It wasn’t 
necessary.)
2 couldn’t (It was prohibited.)
3 had to (It was necessary.)
4 have to (Was it necessary?)
5 didn’t have to (It wasn’t 
necessary.)
6 had to (It was necessary.)
4 1  does the fi lm start (object 
question)
2 makes (subject question)
3 does (subject question)
4 brought (subject question)
5 did you arrive (object question)
6 ate (subject question)
5 1 more interesting 
2 the most colourful 
3 the most popular 
4 the tastiest 
5 better 
6 the loveliest 
7 the most diffi cult 
8 easier
6 1  smells diff erent (everyone = 
third-person singular)
2 feels hot (spicy food = third-
person singular)
3 only tastes good ( food = third-
person singular)
4 tastes delicious ( sweet food = 
third-person singular)
5 taste bad ( food items = third-
person plural)
6 smells good (something = third-
person singular)
7 1 yours (= your fl at)
2 this (this + noun) 
3 Whose (question about 
possession)
4 hers (= her bag)
5 theirs (= their house)
6 its (= its tail)
8 1 for me
2 to buy more
3 some sandwiches for his friends
4 us
5 flowers to your mum/your mum 
flowers
6 her a card/a card for her
7 her a message
9 1 e (usual for me to + infinitive)
2 a (hard for me to + infinitive
3 d (kind of you to + infinitive
4 f (sorry to hear about + in finitive
5 c (careful not to + infinitive)
6 b (be better to + infinitive)
 10 1  anyone (negative question, any 
person)
2 Everyone (all people)
3 someone (We don’t know 
exactly which person.)
4 everywhere (in every place)
5 anything (negative sentence, 
any object)
6 somewhere (We don’t know 
exactly where.)
7 nothing (no object)
 11 1  ’ll happen (will + infinitive for 
predictions)
2 ’ll have (will + infinitive for 
predictions)
3 won’t talk (will not + infinitive for 
predictions)
4 ’m sure they’ll be (be sure … will 
+ infinitive)
5 ’ll lose (will + infinitive)
6 ’ll probably be (will probably + 
infinitive)
 12 1 This curry is too spicy for me. 
2 You look wonderful today.
3 It’s not fl at where I live – it’s 
hilly. 
4 It’s too noisy to work in here.
5 We need to be careful not to 
wake the baby.
6 Thank you, you’ve been very 
helpful.
HOW TO ...
 13 1 were you 
2 is it 
3 wasn’t it 
4 will you 
5 haven’t you 
6 can’t you
96